[1] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V001)
SANSKRIT: satyaṃ jñānamanantamekamamalaṃ dhvastāndhakāraṃ paraṃ nirdvaitaṃ hṛdi padmamadhyanilayaṃ niḥśeṣadhīsākṣiṇam । vedāntopaniviṣṭabodhaviṣayaṃ pratyaktayā yogināṃ bhaktyā taṃ praṇīpatya vedaśiraso vakṣyāmi sadvārtikam
ENGLISH: Having bent down with devotion to that one, who is true being, knowledge, infinite, one, without any defilement, without darkness, the transcendent, without duality, whose seat is in the heart-lotus, the witness of all cognition(s), the object—and that the interior one—of the insight of the Yogins, (which insight is) transmitted by the Upaniṣads, I will relate a true vārtikam on the head of the Veda.

[2] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V002)
SANSKRIT: yasyedaṃ sakalāmalendukiraṇaprakhyairyaśoraśmibhi — rvyāptaṃ yaśca kṛpālutāparavaśaścakre hitaṃ duḥkhinām । yadvāṇīkuliśāvarugṇamatayaḥ peturdiśastārkikā bhaktyā pūjyatamaṃ praṇamya tamahaṃ tadbhāṣyanītau yate
ENGLISH: To him, by the rays of whose glory, clear as the rays of the full, brightly shining moon, this (earth) is filled, who, overcome by compassion, made welfare for the afflicted ones, by the axe of whose speech the opinions of the logicians are destroyed and they themselves dispersed, (to him) having bent down with devotion, I (will) strive after the wisdom of his commentary.

[3] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V003)
SANSKRIT: taittirīyakasārasya mayā''cāryaprasādataḥ । vispaṣṭārtharucīnāṃ hi vyākhyeyaṃ sampraṇīyate
ENGLISH: I have composed this explanation of the essence of the taittirīya (upaniṣad) through the favour of my teacher for those who desire (to know) a clear sense.

[4] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V004)
SANSKRIT: duritakṣayahetūni nityāni brāhmaṇo yayuḥ । kāmyāni ceha karmāṇi dṛṣṭādṛṣṭaphalāni tu
ENGLISH: The daily obligatory rites, which cause the destruction of evil, and the optional rites belong to the Brāhmaṇa(-section), they, however, have their seen and unseen fruit here.

[5] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V005)
SANSKRIT: vidyā prastūyate'thordhvaṃ yathābhūtārthabodhinī । karmopādānahetūṃstānsaivocchettumalaṃ yataḥ
ENGLISH: Next knowledge, which makes true reality known, is brought up for discussion, for only (knowledge) can destroy the causes of clinging to (ritual) activity.

[6] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V006)
SANSKRIT: sa yathākāma ityevaṃ yo'kāmaśceti sādaram । kāmākāmaikahetū no bandhamokṣau śrutirjagau
ENGLISH: (Through the words) "As (is) his desire" and "who is without desire" the śruti says intentionally that attachment (to action) has its sole cause in desire and release its sole cause in freedom from desire.

[7] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V007)
SANSKRIT: apaviddhadvaye tattve sarvadaivātmarūpake । viparyayo'nabhijñānāttataḥ kāmaḥ kriyāstataḥ
ENGLISH: Whereas reality which is without a second is always of the nature of the Self, error originates from ignorance (anabhijñānam), from that (originates) desire, from that (originates) action.

[8] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V008)
SANSKRIT: yadajñānātpravṛttiryā tajjñānātsā kuto bhavet । tasmātsarvapravṛttīnāmalaṃ vidyopaśāntaye
ENGLISH: Activity (originates) from ignorance thereof, how could it (originate) from knowledge thereof? Therefore: only knowledge can remove all activity.

[9] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V009)
SANSKRIT: mokṣārthī na pravarteta tatra kāmyaniṣiddhayoḥ । nityanaimittike kuryātpratyavāyajihāsayā
ENGLISH: (Objection:) "He who desires release may abstain then from optional (rites) and prohibited (acts). He may perform the daily obligatory and occasional (rites) in accordance with his wish to avoid sin.

[10] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V010)
SANSKRIT: iti mīmāṃsakammanyaiḥ karmoktaṃ mokṣasādhanam । pratyākhyāyā''tmavijñānaṃ tatra nyāyena nirṇayaḥ
ENGLISH: Thus the means of release is described by those who consider themselves Mīmāṃsaka, whereas they reject the knowledge of the Self. In this case we may have recourse to logic.

[11] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V011)
SANSKRIT: naitadevaṃ bhavennyāyyaṃ viruddhaphaladāyinām । sambhavātkarmaṇāṃ puṃso bhūyasāṃ śāstradarśanāt
ENGLISH: That is not right because for a man there are possible numerous deeds which give a contrary result, as sacred scripture shows.

[12] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V012)
SANSKRIT: anārabdhaphalānīha santi karmāṇi koṭiśaḥ । tadya iheti vacaso gamyatāṃ karmaṇāṃ sthitiḥ
ENGLISH: Deeds of which the results have not begun (to take effect) are here in innumerable quantities. From the words: 'Who are here' must be understood the (continued) existence of deeds.

[13] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V013)
SANSKRIT: na caikadehe bhogo'sti brahmahatyāśvamedhayoḥ । viruddhaphalahetutvānmūḍhasāttvikadehayoḥ
ENGLISH: In one life one cannot reap the fruits of the murder of a Brahman and of (the performance of) the horse-sacrifice, because the results of these (deeds) are contrary in a foolish and a virtuous existence.

[14] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V014)
SANSKRIT: saptajanmānugaṃ kāryamekasyāpīha karmaṇaḥ । śrūyate dharmaśāstreṣu kimutānekakarmaṇām
ENGLISH: The performance of one single deed is followed here by seven births, thus it is related in the dharma-books. By how much more (the performance) of several deeds.

[15] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V015)
SANSKRIT: anārabdheṣṭakāryāṇāṃ nityaṃ ceddhvastaye matam । naivaṃ svātmākriyāhetuṃ yato'narthaṃ nihanti tat
ENGLISH: If it be thought that the daily obligatory (rites) (aim at) the destruction of desired (and undesired) effects, which have not (yet) begun (to operate), that is not so. For they destroy that evil, that is caused by not performing them (viz. the daily obligatory rites) oneself.

[16] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V016)
SANSKRIT: pāpasya karmaṇaḥ kāryaṃ pratyavāyagirocyate । nityairvirodhāttaddhānirna tviṣṭaphaladāyinaḥ
ENGLISH: The effect of a wicked deed is denoted by the word "sin" (*pratyavāya*). There is destruction of that (viz. of the effect of a wicked deed), because of its contrariety to the daily obligatory rites, but (there is) no (destruction of a deed) which gives a desired effect.

[17] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V017)
SANSKRIT: kāmaśca karmaṇo hetustasyocchitterna sambhavaḥ । pratyagbodhamṛte yasmādasamyagidamucyate
ENGLISH: Desire is the cause of action and cannot therefore be destroyed without insight into the inner (Self.). (So) this is not correctly expressed.

[18] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V018)
SANSKRIT: yaddhyanātmaphalaṃ tasmai karma sarvaṃ vidhīyate । āptatvādātmanaḥ karma naiva syādāptaye tataḥ
ENGLISH: All action is prescribed for a result that is not the Self, for the Self has (already) been reached. Consequently action cannot be (undertaken) in order to reach (the Self).

[19] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V019)
SANSKRIT: nityānāṃ cākriyā'bhāvaḥ pratyavāyastataḥ kutaḥ । na hyabhāvādbhavedbhāvo mānaṃ yasmānna vidyate
ENGLISH: If non-performance of the daily obligatory rites is non-being, whence then (would arise) sin (i.e. a positive result)? For being cannot arise from non-being, because there exists no means of valid knowledge (thereof).

[20] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V020)
SANSKRIT: pūrvopacitakarmabhyastasmātkartārameti yā । pratyavāyakriyā tasyā lakṣaṇārthaḥ śatā bhavet
ENGLISH: Therefore: the affix *-at* may be for the sake of indirectly indicating something sinful (i.e. evil karma, that has evil results, demerit (*pāpam*)), which returns to the agent by the deeds (of which the effects) were heaped up previously.

[21] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V021)
SANSKRIT: nityānāmakriyā yasmāllakṣayitvaiti satvarā । pratyavāyakriyāṃ tasmāllakṣaṇārthe śatā bhavet
ENGLISH: Because the non-performance of the daily obligatory (rites) indicates indirectly (and) becomes immediately doing something sinful, therefore the affix -at may denote (this) indirectly.

[22] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V022)
SANSKRIT: sarvapramāṇakopaḥ syādabhāvādbhāvasambhave । tasmādayatnataḥ sthānamātmanītyatipelavam
ENGLISH: It would be in conflict with every means of valid knowledge, if being could arise from non-being. It is therefore too subtle (to assume) that abiding in the Self (is possible) without effort.

[23] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V023)
SANSKRIT: nirdhūtātiśayā prītiḥ karmaheturiti tvayā । yadabhāṇi tadanyāyyaṃ yathā tadabhidhīyate
ENGLISH: What has been stated by you, (viz.) that the joy of which pre- eminence is shaken off is caused by action, is not right. Why? This will be explained.

[24] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V024)
SANSKRIT: mukteḥ kauṭasthyarūpatvānna tasyāḥ karma sādhanam । svargādivadanityā syādyadi syātkarmaṇaḥ phalam
ENGLISH: (Ritual) activity is not the means of release, for release is of unchangeable nature. If release were the fruit of action, it would be non-eternal, like heaven, etc.

[25] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V025.026)
SANSKRIT: anityaphaladāyitvaṃ jñānahīnasya karmaṇaḥ । kūṭasthaphaladāyitvaṃ vidyetasyeti cenmatam naivamārabhyamāṇasya hyanityatvasamanvayāt । na ca prāptamanityatvaṃ vidyā vārayituṃ kṣamā
ENGLISH: (Objection:) Action without knowledge yields a non-eternal fruit, (but action) in conjunction with knowledge yields an un- changeable fruit, thus it may be thought. (Refutation:) (That is) not so, because there is an invariable connection between transient existence and something begun. And knowledge cannot ward off transient existence, which has been logically established.

[26] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V027)
SANSKRIT: pradhvaṃsābhāvavaccetsyāt karmakāryamapi dhruvam । bhāvātmakatvānmokṣasya naivamapyupapadyate
ENGLISH: (Objection:) The effect of an action could also be something permanent like non-being through destruction. (Refutation:) That is not acceptable to me, because release is of the nature of being.

[27] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V028)
SANSKRIT: kāryaṃ pradhvaṃsato'nyadyattadanityaṃ kriyotthiteḥ । ghaṭādivatpratijñāyāṃ viśiṣṭatvādadoṣatā
ENGLISH: An effect, which is different from destruction, is non-eternal, for it originates from action, like a pot, etc. There is no fallacy in my thesis, because there is a differentiation.

[28] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V029)
SANSKRIT: pradhvaṃsācchakalādi syāttaccānityaṃ ghaṭādivat । kalpanāmātrato'bhāvo naivārabhyaḥ sa karmabhiḥ
ENGLISH: Like a pot, etc., the pieces, etc., may be non-eternal through destruction (also). Non-being (exists) by nothing but mental con- struction. (Release) cannot be attained by rites.

[29] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V030)
SANSKRIT: āvirbhāvatirobhāvairdharmiṇyāṃ mṛdi sarvadā । dharmā ghaṭādayaḥ sarve vartante na tvabhāvagāḥ
ENGLISH: By manifestation (and) disappearance all properties like a pot, etc., are always extant in the clay, that bears the properties, but they have nothing to do with non-being.

[30] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V031)
SANSKRIT: nāstyabhāvasya sambandhaḥ kriyayā vā guṇena vā । nirātmakatvānnaivālaṃ sambaddhuṃ kenacit kvacit
ENGLISH: There exists no relation between non-being and action or quality, for it (non-being) has no existence of its own. It can never be connected with whatsoever.

[31] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V032)
SANSKRIT: tasmātsyātkalpanāmātro vyavahāraprasiddhaye । pradhvaṃsādirabhāvo'yaṃ śilāputrādivanmṛṣā
ENGLISH: Destruction, etc., is therefore nothing but mental construction (set forth) to explain (reality on) the empirical level. This non-being is unreal like the son of a rock, etc.

[32] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V033)
SANSKRIT: tasmādavidyāvyucchittau syādavasthānamātmani । na cāvidyāprahāṇaṃ syādbrahmavidyāmṛte kvacit
ENGLISH: Therefore when ignorance is destroyed, there is abiding in the Self. But by no means will there be cessation of ignorance without the knowledge of Brahman.

[33] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V034)
SANSKRIT: tasmādvidyāptaye jñeyā prārabdhopaniṣatparā । saivāvidyāpanuttyarthā vidyā caivātmagāminī
ENGLISH: This supreme upaniṣad should be known therefore (to be) in order to obtain knowledge. The object of this commencement (of writing a commentary on this) upaniṣad is the removing of ignorance and it (the upaniṣad) is (identical to) that knowledge, which makes known the Self.

[34] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V035)
SANSKRIT: vidyāsaṃśīlināṃ yasmād garbhajanmādyaśeṣataḥ । upamṛdnāti vidyeyaṃ tasmādupaniṣad bhavet
ENGLISH: Because this knowledge entirely destroys conception, birth, etc., of those who are intimately acquainted with this knowledge, it may be (called) therefore: upaniṣad.

[35] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V036)
SANSKRIT: upetya vā niṣaṇṇaṃ tacchreya ātyantikaṃ yataḥ । tasmādupaniṣajjñeyā granthastu syāttadarthataḥ
ENGLISH: Or because this continual bliss, when approached, (is) near at hand, it must be known (to be) upaniṣad therefore. The text (is called upaniṣad), for it has this (bliss) as its content(s).

[36] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V037)
SANSKRIT: prāṇavṛttestathā cāhno devatā yā'bhimāninī । mitraḥ śaṃ naḥ sukhaṃ bhūyāditi brahmeha yācyate
ENGLISH: May Mitra, who is the divinity whose special dominion is that of the day and of the activity of the vital air which goes upwards, be propitious to us, (i.e.) may happiness fall to our share; thus Brahman is requested here.

[37] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V038)
SANSKRIT: rātrerapānavṛtteśca varuṇaścābhimānabhāk । śaṃ no bhavatu sarvatra cakṣusthaścāryamā raviḥ
ENGLISH: Varuṇa, whose special dominion is that of the function of the vital air which goes downwards and of the night, may always be propitious to us and so (may) Aryaman, the sun, who resides in the eye, be.

[38] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V039)
SANSKRIT: bale tu bhagavānindro vāci buddhau bṛhaspatiḥ । viṣṇuścorukramaḥ śaṃ no vistīrṇakramaṇo hyasau
ENGLISH: The venerable Indra (who resides) in force, Bṛhaspati (who resides) in the voice (and) in the mind and (may) far—stepping Viṣṇu —for he makes long steps—(be) propitious to us.

[39] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V040)
SANSKRIT: adhyātmadevatāḥ sarvā mitrādyāḥ śaṃ bhavantu naḥ । sukhakṛtsu hi tāsu syād vighnopaśamanaṃ dhruvam
ENGLISH: May all the deities of the microcosmical self, Mitra, etc., be propitious to us. For if they are propitious, one can be certain to remove the obstacles.

[40] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V041)
SANSKRIT: śravaṇaṃ dhāraṇaṃ caivamupayogaśca siddhyati । jñānasyāpratibandhena prārthanīyamato bhavet
ENGLISH: Hearing, memory and application (i.e. communication) succeed thus, when knowledge is not obstructed. Hence it should be asked for.

[41] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V042)
SANSKRIT: brahmavidyopasargāṇāṃ śāntyarthaṃ vāyurūpiṇe । brahmajijñāsunā kārye namaskāroktikarmaṇī
ENGLISH: To allay the obstacles to the knowledge of Brahman two things whould be done by him who is desirous of knowing Brahman: reverence and salutation to (Brahman) in the form of Vāyu.

[42] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V043)
SANSKRIT: sarvakriyāphalānāṃ hi brahmādhīnatvahetutaḥ । vāyave brahmaṇe tasmai prahvībhāvo'stu sarvadā
ENGLISH: Because the fruits of all deeds are dependent on Brahman, one should always bow humbly before Vāyu—that is: Brahman.

[43] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V044)
SANSKRIT: parokṣyeṇa namaskṛtya pratyakṣeṇa namaskriyā । parokṣasākṣādrūpābhyāṃ vāyurevābhidhīyate
ENGLISH: After homage is paid (to Brahman) as invisible, homage is paid (to Brahman) as visible. Vāyu is called with both forms, the invisible and the visible.

[44] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V045)
SANSKRIT: pratyakṣaṃ brahma he vāyo tvamevāsīti saṃstutiḥ । tvāmevāto vadiṣyāmi sākṣāttvamupalabhyase
ENGLISH: The eulogy (is): “Vāyu! Thou art the visible Brahman. Therefore I will speak to thee. Thou art manifestly perceived”.

[45] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V046)
SANSKRIT: yathāśāstraṃ yathākāryaṃ buddhau supariniścitam । ṛtaṃ tattvadadhīnatvād vadiṣyāmīti saṅgatiḥ
ENGLISH: That which is according to sacred scripture, which is proper to be done, which is thoroughly settled in the mind, which is right, I will call (thee), because it is dependent on thee, so (is) the context.

[46] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V047)
SANSKRIT: prayogasthaṃ tadevartaṃ satyamityabhidhīyate । tadapi tvadadhīnatvād vadiṣyāmyeva sāmpratam
ENGLISH: That, which is right, is called “true”, when it is practised. That also I will properly call (thee), for it is dependent on thee.

[47] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V048)
SANSKRIT: vidyārthinā stutaṃ sanmāṃ brahmāvatu guruṃ ca me । vidyāgrahaṇavaktṛtvaśaktibhyāṃ nau sadā'vatu
ENGLISH: May Brahman, praised by him who is eager for knowledge, protect my teacher and myself. May it always protect both of us by (granting) two faculties: the acquisition of knowledge (and) the ability of speech.

[48] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V049)
SANSKRIT: vidyāprāptyupasargāṇāṃ triḥ śāntirabhidhīyate । ācāryaśiṣyayostasyāṃ brahma jñātuṃ hi śakyate
ENGLISH: For (removing) the hindrances to acquiring knowledge “peace” is said three times. For when (peace) prevails both in the teacher (and) in the pupil, it is possible to know Brahman.

[49] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V050)
SANSKRIT: arthajñānapradhānatvād vedāntānāṃ vipaścitām । pāṭhe tvayatno mā prāpaditi śikṣā'bhidhīyate
ENGLISH: Because recitation is the basis of understanding the meaning of the Upaniṣads, therefore the wise ones may not neglect it (the recitation). So the science of pronunciation is expounded (here).

[50] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V051)
SANSKRIT: śikṣyate jñāyate sākṣād varṇādyuccāraṇaṃ yayā । syādvā karmaṇi śikṣeti vyākhyāsyāmo'dhunā tu tām
ENGLISH: (That) through which the right pronunciation of sounds, etc., is actually learnt, (i.e.) apprehended—or śikṣā may pertain to the object itself (viz. the sounds, etc.)—that we will mention now.

[51] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V052)
SANSKRIT: akārādirbhavedvarṇa udāttādiḥ svarastathā । hrasvadīrghaplutā mātrāḥ prayatnaśca balaṃ smṛtam
ENGLISH: Varṇa (is) the sound "a", etc., so svara the acutely accented vowel, etc. The prosodical instants (are) long, short (or) prolated. Balam is declared (to be) stress.

[52] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V053)
SANSKRIT: samatā sāma varṇānāṃ vaiṣamyasya vivarjanam । santānaḥ saṃhitā tu syāditi śikṣopadiśyate
ENGLISH: Sāman (is) the mutual harmony of vowels, (i.e.) the avoidance of unevenness. Saṃtāna (is) the linking. Thus the science of pronunciation is expounded.

[53] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V054)
SANSKRIT: sūkṣmārthānupraveśāya bahiṣpravaṇacetasām । saṃhitāviṣayaṃ tāvatsthūlopāsanamucyate
ENGLISH: To introduce those whose minds are directed outwards to a subtle subject, the rough meditation, concerned with the combina- tions, is expounded first.

[54] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V055)
SANSKRIT: saṃhitādinimittaṃ yadyaśastannau sahāstviti । ācāryaśiṣyayostadvad brahmavarcasamāvayoḥ
ENGLISH: May the splendour, caused by the combinations, etc., be with us, thus. (May) brahmanical illustriousness in like manner (be) with us, the teacher (and) the pupil.

[55] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V056)
SANSKRIT: yaśaḥkhyātiḥ prakāśaḥ syād vṛttasvādhyāyahetujam । brahmavarcasamityāhustejo yattannibandhanam
ENGLISH: Splendour, that is renown (and) brightness, caused by good conduct and study (of the Veda). They call the brahmanical illustriousness illustrious energy, which has its cause therein (i.e. in good conduct and study).

[56] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V057)
SANSKRIT: śiṣyasyā''śīriyaṃ jñeyā nā''cāryasya kṛtārthataḥ । anāptapuruṣārthānāmāśīrvādo hi yujyate
ENGLISH: This must be understood (to be) a prayer of the pupil, not of the teacher, for he (the teacher) has (already) attained his goal. The utterance of a prayer is proper in the case of human ends not (yet) being secured.

[57] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V058)
SANSKRIT: vedādhyayanavijñānādanantaramidaṃ yataḥ । nedīyaḥ saṃhitājñānamatastadabhidhīyate
ENGLISH: Because this (knowledge is imparted) immediately after the knowledge (acquired) from studying the Veda, therefore this knowledge of the combinations is expounded (now).

[58] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V059)
SANSKRIT: saṃhitāviṣayaṃ jñānamihopaniṣaducyate । pañcādhikaraṇāṃ tāṃ tu vyākhyāsyāmo'dhunā sphuṭam
ENGLISH: The knowledge, concerned with the combinations, is called "secret doctrine" (upanishad). Now we will explain in detail this (secret doctrine) which consists of five sections.

[59] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V060)
SANSKRIT: adhilokamadhijyotiradhividyamadhiprajam । adhyātmaṃ ceti lokādermahattvāttadvido jaguḥ । tā mahāsaṃhitāḥ sarvā iti tā ya upāsate
ENGLISH: "On the universe, on light, on knowledge, on procreation, on the Self", thus those who know these (combinations) call them, because of the greatness of the universe, etc. They meditate on these (combinations, with the words): "These are the great combinations altogether".

[60] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V061)
SANSKRIT: dṛṣtikramavidhānārthāstvathaśabdā amī smṛtāḥ । lokādīnadhikṛtyokteradhilokādyato bhavet
ENGLISH: The words "now" (atha) are related here to arrange the succession of the identifying contemplations. Hence (the expressions) "on the (adhi) universe", etc., are (used thus) because they are said with regard to the universe, etc.

[61] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V062)
SANSKRIT: pṛthivyagnirathācāryo mātā yā cādharā hanuḥ । pūrvaṃ syātsaṃhitārūpaṃ divādityādyathottaram
ENGLISH: Earth, fire, teacher, mother and the lower jawbone are the preceding forms of the combinations. Heaven, sun, etc., (are) the subsequent (forms).

[62] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V069)
SANSKRIT: chandaḥśabdastrayo vedāstatpradhānatvakāraṇāt । ṛṣabho viśvarūpaśca sarvavāgvyāptikāraṇāt
ENGLISH: The three Vedas (are indicated through) the words: "sacred texts". Because it (the syllable Oṃ) is pre-eminent among them (viz. the Vedas), (the syllable Oṃ is called) a bull and it assumes all forms because it pervades all speech.

[63] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V070)
SANSKRIT: amṛtebhyo'sau vedebhyaḥ pratibhātaḥ prajāpateḥ । oṅkārasya hi nityatvānnāñjasotpattirucyate
ENGLISH: This (syllable Oṃ) has appeared (manifested itself) from the immortal Vedas through Prajāpati. Because the syllable Oṃ is eternal, there can rightly be no question of (its) originating.

[64] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V071)
SANSKRIT: oṅkāraḥ sarvakāmeśaḥ sa indraḥ parameśvaraḥ । medhayā prajñayā māṃ sa spṛṇotu prīṇayatviti
ENGLISH: The syllable Om is the lord of all wishes. May it, (worshipped in the form of) Indra, the supreme Lord, save me, (i.e.) may it be kind to me, through intelligence, (i.e.) discrimination.

[65] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V072)
SANSKRIT: amṛtatvaikahetoḥ syāmātmajñānasya dhāraṇaḥ
ENGLISH: May I be a bearer of the knowledge of the Self, which is the sole cause of immortality.

[66] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V073)
SANSKRIT: vicakṣaṇaṃ ca me bhūyāccharīraṃ deva sarvadā । manaḥprahlādinī me syājjihvā madhurabhāṣiṇī
ENGLISH: And may my body always be splendid, O god, may my tongue be sweet as honey, (i.e.) causing joy to the mind.

[67] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V074)
SANSKRIT: karṇābhyāṃ caiva vedārthaṃ bhūri viśruṇuyāmyaham । brahmaṇaścāsi kośastvamaseriva parātmanaḥ
ENGLISH: May I abundantly hear with both my ears the sense of the Veda. For thou art the sheath of Brahman, the transcendent Self, like (the sheath) of a sword.

[68] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V075)
SANSKRIT: apaviddhaiṣaṇā yasmāttvayi paśyanti tatparam । abhidhānapratīkatvadvāreṇāsyopalabdhaye । tvameva hetutāṃ yāsi tasmātkośastvamucyase
ENGLISH: Because those who are without desire behold that transcendent (Brahman) in thee (i.e. the syllable Om), because thou art a symbol in language—thou alone art the cause of perceiving it (viz. Brahman)—, therefore thou art called a sheath.

[69] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V076)
SANSKRIT: laukikaprajñayā yasmānmedhayā pihitastataḥ । nopāsate parākcittāstvāṃ devamamṛtapradam
ENGLISH: Because thou art veiled by intelligence, (i.e.) secular discrimination, therefore those, whose minds are bent on the outer world, do not worship thee, (though thou art) a god, granting immortality.

[70] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V079)
SANSKRIT: kurvāṇāmubhayaṃ deva ciramāvaha me śriyam । tato vedārthavijñānādannapānāntadāyinīm
ENGLISH: Bring me prosperity, O God, which procures both for a long time, giving (clothes, cows) up to and including food and drink, after the knowledge of the meaning of the Veda.

[71] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V080)
SANSKRIT: lomaśāṃ paśubhiryuktāṃ pratyekaṃ sarvadeti ca । mantrāntajñāpanārthāya svāhākāro'yamucyate
ENGLISH: (Wealth) consisting of woolly (sheep) together with kine, one by one and always. The indeclinable word "svāhā" is uttered here to denote the end of each mantra.

[72] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V086)
SANSKRIT: brahmaṇaḥ kośabhūtaṃ tvāṃ bhagavanpraviśāmyaham । māṃ ca sarvātmabhāvena praviśeśa prasīda me
ENGLISH: Into thee, who art the sheath of Brahman, I enter, O gracious one. Enter into me with thy whole own being, O Lord, (i.e.) become placid within me.

[73] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V087)
SANSKRIT: aikātmyamāvayorastu bhedahetuṃ vināśaya । anantabhede tvayyeva nimṛje duṣkṛtaṃ tataḥ
ENGLISH: May we be identical. Destroy the cause of difference. In the [unclear] consisting of countless parts, I purify myself from sin.

[74] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V088)
SANSKRIT: drutamāpo yathā yanti nimnena makarālayam । tathaivāyantu māṃ sarve samantād brahmacāriṇaḥ
ENGLISH: Like waters flow quickly through depths to the sea, so may all those who study the sacred texts come to me from all sides.

[75] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V089)
SANSKRIT: yasminnahāni jīryante so'bdo'harjara ucyate । aharjare yathā māsā yanti samvatsarātmani
ENGLISH: The year, in which the days become old, is called here: making-the-days-old. Like months pass away in the making-the-days-old, (i.e.) the essence of the year (so may those who study the sacred texts come to me).

[76] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V090)
SANSKRIT: āsannagṛhaparyāyaḥ prativeśa ihocyate । prativeśa ivāsi tvaṃ sarvaduḥkhāpanodakṛt
ENGLISH: "Neighbouring house" is used here as a synonym for "vicinal house". Thou art like a neighbouring house, that removes all sorrow.

[77] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V091)
SANSKRIT: pratiprāṇipraveśādvā prativeśo'si kīrtyase । māṃ pratyataḥ prabhāhi tvaṃ pramāpadyasva cāñjasā
ENGLISH: Or, by neighbouring every living being, thou art thus praised: "Thou art a neighbour". Therefore, enlighten me and take thine abode within me soon.

[78] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V092)
SANSKRIT: upāsanamathedānīṃ vyāhṛtyātmana ucyate । svārājyaphalasiddhyarthaṃ mahimā'to'sya kīrtyate
ENGLISH: Now the meditation on the nature of the holy utterances will be expounded to reach the fruit, (viz.) sovereignty. Therefore its greatness is praised.

[79] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V093)
SANSKRIT: bhūrbhuvaḥ svariti jñeyāḥ prasiddhā vyāhṛtīrnaraiḥ । tisrastāsāṃ caturthīṃ tu maha ityṛṣirabhyadhāt
ENGLISH: Bhūr, bhuvaḥ and svaḥ, these must be known (to be) the three holy utterances, famous among men. Besides these a sage has related a fourth: mahah.

[80] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V096)
SANSKRIT: caturthī vyāhṛtiryeyaṃ brahmetyevamupāsyatām । mahattvād brahma sā jñeyā ātmā cāpnoti yena sā
ENGLISH: This fourth holy utterance should be meditated upon as (being) Brahman, (thinking) "It is Brahman", for it is great and also as the Self, by which (i.e. the Self) it (i.e. the holy utterance) reaches (all).

[81] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V097.098)
SANSKRIT: ādityacandrabrahmānnabhūtena vyāpinā yataḥ lokadevādayo vyāptā ātmā tena maho bhavet । devatāgrahaṇaṃ cātra pariśiṣṭopalakṣaṇam
ENGLISH: Because the universe, gods, etc., are pervaded by the pervading (holy utterance *mahaḥ*) in the form of sun, moon, Brahman and food, therefore *mahaḥ* is the Self. The word "gods" indicates here the remaining one.

[82] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V099)
SANSKRIT: lokā devāstathā vedāḥ prāṇāścāṅgāni sarvaśaḥ । maha ityasya jñeyāni vyāhṛtyātmana eva hi
ENGLISH: The worlds, the gods, the Vedas, the vital airs altogether should be known (to be) limbs of this *mahaḥ*, which is indeed the essence of the holy utterances.

[83] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V100)
SANSKRIT: mahīyante yataḥ sarva ādityādyātmanā pare । maha ityevamuktena tasmādātmā bhavenmahaḥ
ENGLISH: Because all the following ones are magnified through this Self, which is the sun, etc., being called *mahaḥ*, therefore *mahaḥ* may be the Self.

[84] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V101)
SANSKRIT: ātmanā hi mahīyante hastādyaṅgāni sarvaśaḥ । yathā lokādayastadvadādityādyātmanaidhitāḥ
ENGLISH: Just as the limbs like the hands, etc., altogether are magnified through the Self, likewise the worlds, etc., are enlarged (or prosper) by the Self, which is the sun, etc.

[85] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V102)
SANSKRIT: ayaṃ loko'gnirṛgvedaḥ prāṇaśceti caturvidhā । bhūriti vyāhṛtirjñeyā tathaivānyā yathākramam
ENGLISH: The holy utterance bhūh should be known (to be) fourfold— viz. this world, fire, the Rgveda and the inward vital air. In like manner (are) the other (holy utterances) successively (fourfold).

[86] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V103)
SANSKRIT: antarikṣaṃ ca vāyuśca sāma cāpāna eva ca । caturdhā bhuva ityeṣā dvitīyā vyāhṛtirmatā
ENGLISH: The second holy utterance bhuvah is thought (to be) fourfold viz. the intermediate space (between heaven and earth), the wind (air), the Sāmaveda and the downward vital air.

[87] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V104)
SANSKRIT: dyaurādityo yajuśceti vyānaśceti caturthyapi । mahaśceti purā proktā catasraḥ syuścaturvidhāḥ
ENGLISH: (The third holy utterance suvah is thought to be fourfold, viz.) heaven, the sun, the Yajurveda (and) the circulating vital air. The fourth (holy utterance) mahah has already been related. (These) four (holy utterances) are fourfold.

[88] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V105)
SANSKRIT: uktānāṃ punaruktiḥ syādupāsāniyiyaṃsayā । yathoktā vyāhṛtiretāvedopāste tu yo naraḥ । sa veda sakalaṃ brahma vakṣyamāṇaviśeṣaṇam
ENGLISH: According to the wish to sustain the meditation there is a repetition of what has already been said. The man who knows, (i.e.) meditates, on these holy utterances as they have been related, will know entirely Brahman, which has the attributes yet to be mentioned.

[89] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V110)
SANSKRIT: tisro vyāhṛtayo yasya brahmaṇo'ṅgānyavādiṣam । sthānādisiddhaye tasya paraḥ sandarbha ucyate
ENGLISH: To establish the abode, etc., of Brahman of which the three holy utterances are the limbs, as I have explained, the following sectionis related.

[90] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V111)
SANSKRIT: sa yaḥ parokṣanirdiṣṭaḥ pratyakṣeṇa sa darśyate । antarhṛdaya ākāśe paśyātmānaṃ tvamātmanā
ENGLISH: That, which has (up to now) been indicated as not directly perceptible, becomes directly manifest in the inner space of the heart. (Therein) behold yourself the Self.

[91] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V112)
SANSKRIT: padmākāro hi māṃsasya khaṇḍo hṛdayamucyate । ākāśastasya madhye yo buddherāyatanaṃ sadā । tasminsa puruṣo jñeyo manomaya ihāñjasā
ENGLISH: The lotus-shaped piece of flesh is called the heart. The space within that (piece of flesh) is the permanent seat of the mind. The person therein must truly be known to consist of mind (manas).

[92] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V113.114)
SANSKRIT: śaśistharāhuvatsākṣānmasyevopalabhyate manute manasā yasmāttenāyaṃ syānmanomayaḥ । syādvā tadabhimānitvāttalliṅgāttanmayaḥ smṛtaḥ
ENGLISH: He is clearly perceived in the mind (manas) like Rāhu who is in the moon. Because one thinks with one's mind (manas), one is said therefore to consist of mind (manas). Or because that (i.e. the mind) is his special dominion and because of this characteristic term (viz. manas) he is thought to consist thereof.

[93] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V115)
SANSKRIT: amṛto'maraṇadharmā syāddhiraṇyaṃ jyotirucyate । tanmayo'yaṃ pumāndhyeyastatprāptau dvārathocyate
ENGLISH: "Immortal" means: not liable to mortality. "Gold" is said to be light. One should reflect upon this person as consisting of these (properties just mentioned). The way to reach it is related now (viz. in the following stanza).

[94] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V119)
SANSKRIT: dvitīyayā'tha vyāhṛtyā vāyau sampratitiṣṭhati । āditye suvarityevaṃ lokeśe pratitiṣṭhiti
ENGLISH: Through (uttering) the second holy utterance (bhuvaḥ) he establishes himself in the wind. (Saying) thus "suvaḥ" he establishes himself in the sun, the lord of the universe.

[95] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V121)
SANSKRIT: nānyo rājā'sti yasyeha rājā yaḥ svayameva tu । sa svarāṭ tasya bhāvaśca svārājyamiha kīrtyate
ENGLISH: He of whom on this earth no one is a king, but who on the contrary is a king himself, (he) is independent, his condition is called here sovereignty.

[96] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V122)
SANSKRIT: manogīścakṣuṣāṃ caiva śrotravijñānayorapi । āpnoti paryupāsīnaḥ svārājyaṃ nātra saṃśayaḥ । tata etatphalaṃ divyaṃ yathoktopāsanādbhavet
ENGLISH: He who meditates, reaches sovereignty over the mind, the voice and the eyes, the organ of hearing and the understanding, this cannot be doubted. Therefore this divine result will arise from meditation as described.

[97] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V123)
SANSKRIT: vyāhṛtyātmana etasya rūpasaṅklṛptaye'dhunā । upāsanavidhitsāyai paro grantho'vatāryate
ENGLISH: To determine the nature of the essence of this holy utterance we now proceed to the following section for the sake of the wish to (perform) meditation.

[98] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V124)
SANSKRIT: viyaddehamidaṃ brahma viyatsadṛśameva vā । mūrtāmūrtasvabhāvaṃ ca trailokyādyātmato bhavet
ENGLISH: This Brahman has space as (its) body or it is spacelike. And (all that consists of) the three worlds, etc., which have the nature of material and non-material, originate from the Self.

[99] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V125)
SANSKRIT: indriyāramaṇaṃ caiva mana ānandameva ca । śāntyā samṛddhamatyarthaṃ brahmaitadamṛtaṃ param
ENGLISH: Whose delight are the senses, whose bliss consists of the mind (*manas*), who is exceedingly perfect through peacefulness, that is the immortal, transcendent Brahman.

[100] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V126)
SANSKRIT: prācīnayogyopāssvaitad yathāvyākhyātalakṣaṇam । māhācamasya ācārya antevāsinamuktavān
ENGLISH: "O Prācīnayogya, meditate" (with these words) the teacher Mahācamasya explained to his pupil (Brahman) with the characteristics that have been related.

[101] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V127)
SANSKRIT: pāṅktasvarūpeṇaitasya bhūyo'pyanyadupāsanam । udāraphalasiddhyarthaṃ pṛthivītyucyate'dhunā
ENGLISH: Moreover another meditation on this (Brahman) by means of its fivefold nature is related now (through the words) "earth" (etc.,) in order to reach a high result.

[102] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V128)
SANSKRIT: pañcabhiryata ārabdhaṃ jagatpāṅktamato bhavet । yajñaḥ klṛpto bhavedevaṃ pāṅkto yajña iti śrutiḥ
ENGLISH: Because the world is produced by the five (elements), it is fivefold therefore. The sacrifice is formed likewise; the śruti (says) "The sacrifice (is) fivefold".

[103] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V129)
SANSKRIT: yajñena pariklṛptena trailokyātmānamaśnute । pāṅktatvasiddhaye tasmādārabdhaiṣā parā śrutiḥ
ENGLISH: Through the sacrifice, (which is) arranged (thus), one attains the essense of the three worlds. To establish this fivefoldness therefore the following śruti is begun (to be explained).

[104] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V130)
SANSKRIT: digantaṃ lokapāṅktaṃ syānnakṣatrāntaṃ ca daivatam । ātmāntaṃ bhūtapāṅktaṃ ca virāḍātmādhikārataḥ
ENGLISH: Up to and including (the word) "quarter" (is indicated) the fivefold (structure of the) world. Up to and including (the word) "stars" (is indicated) the divine (fivefoldness). Up to and including (the word) "self" (is indicated) the fivefold material (structure). "Self" (is here identical to) Virāj on account of the context.

[105] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V131)
SANSKRIT: upalakṣaṇametatsyāddevatālokapāṅktayoḥ । adhibhūtamiti vakṣyāmo'thādhyātmamataḥ param
ENGLISH: (The words) "the macrocosmical" imply here (also): the fivefoldness of the divinities and the world. Below we shall explain (the words) "the microcosmical".

[106] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V133)
SANSKRIT: pāṅktameva jagatsarvamiti dṛṣṭvā'bhyadhādṛṣiḥ । pāṅktaṃ vā idamābrahmastambaṃ nānyaditi sma ha
ENGLISH: Having seen: "Fivefold, indeed, is this whole world", the sage said: "Fivefold, indeed, is this (world) from Brahman to a clump of grass (and) not otherwise".

[107] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V134)
SANSKRIT: ādhyātmikena pāṅktena saṅkhyāsāmānyakāraṇāt । balayatyātmabhāvena pāṅktaṃ bāhyamaśeṣataḥ
ENGLISH: By means of the microcosmical fivefoldness one strengthens the exterior fivefoldness entirely as the self on account of the sameness of number.

[108] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V135)
SANSKRIT: sarvopāsanaśeṣasya praṇavasyādhunocyate । upāsanamalaṃ yasmād brahmaṇoḥ prāptaye dvayoḥ
ENGLISH: Now mention will be made of the meditation on the sacred syllable Oṃ, subsidiary to all meditation, because it can attain the two Brahmans.

[109] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V136)
SANSKRIT: parasya brahmaṇo yasmādaparasya ca codyate । ālambanatayā tasmātsa evātrābhidhīyate
ENGLISH: Because it (viz. the syllable Oṃ) is recommended as a support (for the attainment) of the transcendent and the immanent Brahman, therefore it is mentioned here.

[110] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V137)
SANSKRIT: omityetacchabdarūpaṃ brahmeti manasā sadā । dhārayetstutaye tasya paro grantho'vatāryate
ENGLISH: One may always concentrate one's mind (manas) (thinking) "Om that is Brahman, (having the) form of speech". For the eulogy of this (syllable Om) we now proceed to the following section.

[111] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V138)
SANSKRIT: tadyathā śaṅkunetyevaṃ sarvamomiti yujyate । abhidhānādṛte yasmādabhidheyaṃ na vidyate
ENGLISH: "As (all leaves are held together) by a stalk, so (is all speech) held together by the syllable Om, verily the syllable) Om (is) all (this)", so it is appropriately said, for without a name nothing to be named exists.

[112] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V140)
SANSKRIT: prasauti hyanujānāti brahmomityeva cartvijam । pravakṣyanbrāhmaṇo vedamomityevaṃ prayujyate
ENGLISH: The Brahman (priest) urges, i.e. permits, the officiant, (saying:) "Om". The Brāhmaṇa who is going to recite (teach) the Veda usually says thus: "Om".

[113] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V141.142)
SANSKRIT: upāpnavāni brahmeti sa ca vedamavāpnuyāt parātmā vā bhavedbrahma sa tadokārapūrvakam । prāpnotyeva na sandeha upāsītāta omiti
ENGLISH: (With the words) "May I obtain Brahman" he attains the Veda, or Brahman may be the supreme Self. He attains that (Brahman) without doubt after the syllable Om has been said (with the words) "May he meditate, Om".

[114] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V144)
SANSKRIT: svādhyāyo'dhyayanaṃ jñeyaṃ tathā cādhyāpanaṃ param । ādhātavyā yathāśāstramagnayaḥ śreyase tathā । hotavyamagihotraṃ ca kuryāccātithipūjanam
ENGLISH: "Recitation (of the Veda)" should be known (to be) study and likewise the following (word should be known to be) teaching. In like manner the (sacrificial) fires should be kept up in accordance with the scripture for the sake of welfare. The agnihotram should be performed, guests should be honoured.

[115] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V145)
SANSKRIT: tathā saṃvyavahāraśca mānuṣaṃ syādasaṃśayam
ENGLISH: So (the word) "humanity" may without doubt (indicate) "ordinary life of men".

[116] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V146)
SANSKRIT: utpādyā ca prajā yogyā prajanaṃ cartusevanam । niveśanaṃ sutasyeha prajātiriti gamyatām
ENGLISH: Proper offspring (prajā) should be generated. "Begetting" (prajana) means: sexual intercourse at the proper time. (The word) propagation (prajāti) here (means): the marrying of a son.

[117] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V148)
SANSKRIT: vedārthabodhanaṃ nāsti svādhyāyena vinā yataḥ । tathā pravacanenāto dharmārthaṃ ca grahastayoḥ
ENGLISH: 148. Because no understanding of the sense of the Veda is (possible) without study and likewise (not without) teaching, these two (words) are mentioned therefore also for the sake of dharma.

[118] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V149.150)
SANSKRIT: satyameva tu vaktavyamiti satyavacā jagau । rāthītaro munistadvattapa evetyuvāca ha puruśiṣṭasya tanayaḥ kartavyaṃ tu mahātapāḥ । mudgalasyātmajaścāha kartavye yatnamāsthitaiḥ । svādhyāyapravacane eva te eva tu tapo yataḥ
ENGLISH: "Only the truth should be spoken" the seer Satyavacas, the son of Rathītara, said. "Likewise asceticism should be practised" said the son of Puruśiṣṭa, great in asceticism. The son of Mudgala said: "Recitation (and) study (of the Veda) are to be performed by those who exert themselves, for that (recitation and study of the Veda), verily, is asceticism".

[119] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V151)
SANSKRIT: svādhyāyārthaśca vijñeyaḥ ahaṃ vṛkṣasya rerivā । ityādiruttaro grantho viśuddhirhi tato dhiyaḥ
ENGLISH: The following section (beginning with the words) "I (am) the mover of the tree", etc., should be understood to serve the sake of study, for thereof (comes) the purification of the mind.

[120] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V152)
SANSKRIT: viśuddhamanaso yasmātsamyagjñānodayo bhavet । mantrāmnāyo'yamārabdha etasmātkāraṇātparaḥ
ENGLISH: Because the right knowledge arises for him who has a purified mind (*manas*), (just therefore) the following recitation of mantras is now (*ayam*) commenced.

[121] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V153)
SANSKRIT: ucchittilakṣaṇasyāhaṃ viśvasya jagataḥ sadā । asya saṃsāravṛkṣasya rerivā janako'smyaham
ENGLISH: I am the mover, (i.e.) the producer, of this three of saṃsāra, (i.e.) (I am) always (the producer) of this whole world which is characterized by destruction.

[122] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V154)
SANSKRIT: kīrtiḥ khyātirmamajñeyā gireḥ pṛṣṭhamivocchritā । ūrdhvaṃ tatkāraṇaṃ brahma pavitraṃ bhavahānataḥ
ENGLISH: "(My) fame" must be known (to be) "my renown", rising like a mountain's peak. The exalted Brahman (is) the cause of that (renown). It (Brahman) (is) a means of purification, for it is exempt from becoming.

[123] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V155.156)
SANSKRIT: yasya so'yaṃ bhavedūrdhvaṃ pavitraṃ pāvanaṃ param vājamannamiti jñeyaṃ tadvatīva divākare । svamṛtaṃ paramaṃ brahma buddhāvasyāmahaṃ sadā
ENGLISH: He to whom this exalted means of purification belongs becomes thus: the supreme means of purification. "Vital energy" should be known (to be) food. As the immortal, (i.e.) the transcendent Brahman, is in the sun, which has that (food), (so) I (am) always in this mind.

[124] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V157)
SANSKRIT: draviṇaṃ dhanamityāhuriha tvātmāvabodhanam । savarcasaṃ sudīptaṃ syānmokṣāmṛtaphalapradam
ENGLISH: They say that wealth (is) riches; here, however, (it is) the knowledge of the Self. (This knowledge is) shining, (i.e.) luminous, and yields an imperishable fruit: release.

[125] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V158)
SANSKRIT: akṣito'kṣīṇārūpatvād vedānuvacanaṃ tvidam । triśaṅkorbrahmabhūtasya hyārṣaṃ sandarśanaṃ param
ENGLISH: (It is said:) "indestructible", for he is indestructible by nature. This recitation of Vedic knowledge of Triśaṅku, who has become (one with) Brahman, (should be considered) the highest identifying contemplation of a seer.

[126] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V160)
SANSKRIT: mumukṣostatparasyaivaṃ śrautasmārteṣu karmasu । ārṣaṃ ca prātibhaṃ jñānamāvirbhavati mokṣadam
ENGLISH: For him who desires release and is thus mindful of this there arises, if (he performs) these actions, (mentioned in) śruti (and) smṛti, the intuitive knowledge of the seer, which yields release.

[127] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V161)
SANSKRIT: ārambho niyamārthaḥ syādātmajñānodayātpurā । śrutervedamanūcyeti śrutiścaivānuśāsti hi
ENGLISH: The commencement of (the following section of) the śruti (which begins with the words) "Having taught the Veda" is for the sake of (teaching certain) rules, (to be practised) before the rise of the knowledge of the Self. For it is the śruti which orders thus.

[128] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V162.163)
SANSKRIT: vidyotpattyarthametāni kartavyāni mumukṣuṇā । vakṣyamāṇāni karmāṇi yāvadātmāvabodhanam ātmajñānodayādūrdhvaṃ puruṣārthāvasānataḥ । svataḥ siddheśca mokṣasya karmakāṇḍamanarthakam
ENGLISH: These activities, which will be mentioned (in the section now to be commented upon), should be performed by him who desires release for the sake of the arising of knowledge until the knowledge of the Self (has arisen). After the arising of the knowledge of the Self the ritual-section is useless because the human goal has been reached and because release is self-established.

[129] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V164)
SANSKRIT: tasmātsattvaviśuddhyarthaṃ kāryaṃ karma mumukṣubhiḥ । prāgeva brahmavijñānānniyameneti ha śrutiḥ
ENGLISH: Therefore those who desire release should necessarily perform rite(s) to purify (themselves) entirely, only before (the arising of) the knowledge of Brahman, thus the śruti says.

[130] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V165)
SANSKRIT: ānarthakyāpanuttyarthamṛtādīnāṃ purā śrutiḥ । niyamārthamihoktiḥ syādātmajñānodayārthinaḥ
ENGLISH: Formerly the śruty (beginning with the words) "right", etc., (was) to show that (certain activities) are not useless. Here (rules are) mentioned to restrain (the mind of) him who hankers after the rise of the knowledge of the Self.

[131] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V166)
SANSKRIT: adhyāpya nikhilaṃ vedamantevāsinamādarāt । satyaṃ vadetyevamādi garīyānanuśāsti hi
ENGLISH: Having taught carefully the entire Veda to the pupil, the venerable teacher instructs (the pupil, saying): "Speak the truth", etc.

[132] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V167)
SANSKRIT: yathopalabdhaṃ yadvākyaṃ hiṃsākalkavivarjitam । sarvadharmavidaḥ prājñāstatsatyaṃ pratijānate
ENGLISH: Wise men, who know the dharma entirely, maintain that that sentence, which (is) free from harm (or) deceit in accordance with comprehension, is true.

[133] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V168)
SANSKRIT: agnihotrādyanuṣṭhānaṃ dharmamāhurvipaścitaḥ । pramādaṃ mā kṛthāstadvatsvādhyāyaṃ prati sarvadā
ENGLISH: The wise call dharma the performance of the agnihotram, etc. Likewise you may never be negligent of (the daily) study (of the Veda).

[134] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V169)
SANSKRIT: tathābhilaṣitāṃ nyāyyāmācāryāyātha dakṣiṇām । dattvā dārāṃstvamāhṛtya mācchetsīḥ sutasantatim
ENGLISH: Having thus given a desired, proper gift to the teacher, you should take a wife and not cut off the line of offspring.

[135] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V170)
SANSKRIT: vismṛtyāpyanṛtaṃ nityaṃ na ca vaktavyamaṇvapi । ityasya pratipattyarthaṃ satyādīti punarvacaḥ
ENGLISH: One should never tell a lie, not even a trifle one, not even through forgetfulness. So, for understanding this, once again it is said: "Truth", etc.

[136] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V171)
SANSKRIT: evaṃ śiṣṭeṣvapi jñeyaṃ prasiddhārthatvakāraṇāt । spaṣṭārtha uttaro granthaḥ svayamevāvagamyatām
ENGLISH: So it should be known (to be the case also) with regard to the remaining (instructions). The following section is clear, because the meaning of it is (already) known. It should be understood spontaneously.

[137] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V175)
SANSKRIT: asmatto brāhmaṇā ye syuḥ śreyāṃsaḥ śāstravedinaḥ । teṣāmāsanadānena śramāpanayanaṃ kuru
ENGLISH: Whatever Brahmans there are, (who are) superior to us and know the authoritative books, of those you should dispel their fatigue by giving (them) a seat.

[138] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V176)
SANSKRIT: teṣāmākhyāyikāyāṃ vā na vācyaṃ sambhramāttvayā । taduktasāraṃ tvādāya nāpakāryaṃ yathābalam
ENGLISH: Or, when they are speaking, you should not excitedly (through confusion) (say) something reprehensible, but, hearing the quintessence of what they say, you should avoid offending as much as you can.

[139] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V177.178)
SANSKRIT: śraddhayaiva hi dātavyamaśraddhābhājaneṣvapi śrīrvibhūtistayā deyaṃ deyaṃ cāpi sadā hriyā । bhiyā bhayena dātavyaṃ saṃvinmaitrī tayā'pi ca
ENGLISH: (What is to be given) is to be given with faith, even in (the case of) people, who do not participate in faith. Fortune, (i.e.) opulence---with that should be given and should always be given with modesty. With fear, (i.e.) with awe, should be given and understanding, (i.e.) benevolence, with that also (should be given).

[140] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V182)
SANSKRIT: rahasyaṃ sarvavedānāṃ vedopaniṣaducyate । anuśāsanamīśasya jñeyametatparātmanaḥ
ENGLISH: The Vedopaniṣad is said (to be) the secret of all the Vedas. The instruction is to be known (as that) of the Lord, the supreme Self.

[141] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V183)
SANSKRIT: yasmādevamataḥ sadbhiryathoktaṃ yatnamāsthitaiḥ । upāsitavyaṃ kartavyamevaṃ caitatsamācaret
ENGLISH: Because this (is) so, therefore those, who are endowed with zeal, should meditate, (i.e.) should be active in that manner and thus one should perform this.

[142] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V184)
SANSKRIT: pramādotthādapanyāyād guruśiṣyābhisaṅgateḥ । prasakto yastayordveṣastacchāntyai śāntirucyate
ENGLISH: "Peace" is said to allay the hatred which may be attached to both, the teacher (and) the pupil, when they have come together, through incorrectness caused by negligence.

[143] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V185)
SANSKRIT: syājjñānaṃ phalavadyasmācchāntāntaḥkaraṇo gurau । tasyeśvareṇānantyatvād bhūyaḥ śāntiriyaṃ tataḥ
ENGLISH: Because (imparting) knowledge is fruitful (only), when the mind of the teacher is peaceful on account of his (the teacher's) identity with the Lord, once more "peace" is said.

[144] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V186)
SANSKRIT: bhāvyaṃ tu parihārāya tanmāmāvīditīraṇam । ātmano brahmatāṃ yasmātsvataḥ siddhāṃ pravakṣyati
ENGLISH: "That has protected me" must be understood (to be said) for removing (hindrances), for he (the teacher) is about to explain the self-established Brahmanhood of the Self.

[145] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V001)
SANSKRIT: kāmādayo yadajñānāttajjñānātsyādakāmatā । ataḥ paraṃ tadaikātmyaṃ vakṣyate'jñānaghasmaram
ENGLISH: As desire, etc., (originate) from ignorance, so freedom from desire (originates) from knowledge. Henceforth the oneness of the Self, which destroys ignorance, will be discussed here.

[146] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V002)
SANSKRIT: nā'nāgatamanaitihyaṃ pratyagekamavikriyam । anādeyamaheyaṃ yannamastasmai sadādṛśe
ENGLISH: Honour to this (oneness of the Self), the everlasting witness, which is neither future nor past, interior, one, unchangeable, which can neither be grasped nor left.

[147] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V003)
SANSKRIT: yāvantyupāsanānyādāvaviruddhāni karmabhiḥ । saṃhitāviṣayādīni syustānyabhyudayāya tu
ENGLISH: All meditations (which were related) in the beginning, not incompatible with ritual acts, concerned with the combinations, etc., were (intended) for prosperity.

[148] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V004)
SANSKRIT: na caitāvadavaṣṭambhātkāmakarmodbhavatvataḥ । sarvānarthekabījasya mohasyāsti nirākriyā
ENGLISH: There is no removal of ignorance, the sole cause of all evil, by only taking refuge in (the meditations together with ritual acts), because (ignorance) is the cause of desire (and ritual) activity.

[149] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V005)
SANSKRIT: tasmātsaṃsāramūlasya bhṛśamucchittaye'dhunā । yathābhūtārthabodhyātmajñānaṃ samyakpravakṣyate
ENGLISH: Therefore the knowledge of the Self, which is to be known as it is in reality, will now be properly explained to destroy entirely the cause of the saṃsāra.

[150] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V006)
SANSKRIT: nityakarmādyanuṣṭhānācchuddhāntaḥkaraṇaḥ pumān । viraktaścā''grajāllābhātsvapnaputrādilābhavat
ENGLISH: By performing the daily obligatory rites, etc., a man acquires a pure mind and becomes unattached to previous(ly gained) possession, like (one afterwards becomes free from) the posession of a son, etc., in a dream.

[151] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V007)
SANSKRIT: pratyakṣāgamaliṅgairhi yadyatkarmodbhavaṃ phalam । tatkṣayiṣṇviti vijñāya virakto narakādyathā
ENGLISH: For having perceived through sensory perception, sacred scripture and inference thus: "Whatever fruit has arisen from action, that fruit is perishable", he becomes unattached, as (one becomes unattached) to hell.

[152] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V008)
SANSKRIT: apāstāśeṣadoṣaṃ yatsarvakāmanirāsakṛt । tadanāptaṃ tamomātrātprasiddhyaiva hi tadyataḥ
ENGLISH: That which is entirely without fault, which removes every desire, is not reached only on account of ignorance, because this (ignorance) (is known) by (its) effects only.

[153] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V009)
SANSKRIT: tadanāptikṛdajñānadhvastaye'laṃ na kārakam । pratyagjñāne'dhikāryasmāttyaktapūrvoktasādhanaḥ
ENGLISH: Ritual acts cannot bring about the destruction of ignorance, which causes that it is not reached. On that ground he who has given up the means which has been mentioned before is qualified for the knowledge of the inner (Self).

[154] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V010)
SANSKRIT: tyāga eva hi sarveṣāṃ mokṣasādhanamuttamam । tyajataiva hi tajjñeyaṃ tyaktuḥ pratyakparaṃ padam
ENGLISH: The supreme means of effecting release for every one is renunciation. Only to him who renounces is this (Brahman) knowable. The supreme, inner place is for the one who renounces.

[155] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V011)
SANSKRIT: tyaja dharmamadharmaṃ ca tathā satyānṛte api । nyāso brahmeti ca prāha taittirīyaśrutistathā
ENGLISH: Renounce merit and demerit and likewise what is true and false. "Renunciation (is) Brahman" thus the Taittirīyaśruti says.

[156] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V012)
SANSKRIT: kṣayiṇṇu sādhyaṃ vijñāya niḥśeṣaṃ karmasādhanam । tattyāgasādhanastasmātpratyajñāne pravartate
ENGLISH: Therefore, he who has recognised: "Ritual acts in their entirety are a means which has a perishable result" is active with regard to the knowledge of the inner (Self), his means (to that knowledge being) the renunciation of that (ritual activity).

[157] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V013)
SANSKRIT: utpattyādi svataścetsyātkarmaṇā kiṃ prayojanam । svata eva na cettatsyādvada syātkarmaṇā'tra kim
ENGLISH: If origination, etc., exist by virtue of themselves, what is the use of (ritual) activity? And if (they exist) not by virtue of themselves, say, what (is the use) of action then?

[158] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V014)
SANSKRIT: utpattyādau tu yacchaktaṃ hetumātramapekṣate । karmavyapekṣā tasyaiva ghaṭotpattau mṛdo yathā
ENGLISH: That which is capable of origination, etc., is dependent on mere cause; it is dependent on activity like clay (is dependent on activity) in the case of the production of a pot.

[159] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V015)
SANSKRIT: nityaṃ na bhavanaṃ yasya yasya vā nityabhūtatā । na tasya kriyamāṇatvaṃ khapuṣpākāśayoriva
ENGLISH: That which is never originated or which always exists, is not affected by activity, like a sky-flower and space (are not affected by activity).

[160] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V017)
SANSKRIT: vijijñāsasva taditi brahmajñāne pravartakam । jijñāsyalakṣaṇoktiḥ syādyato vā iti ca śrutiḥ
ENGLISH: "Desire to know that", (these words) incite to know Brahman. The attributes (of Brahman) which should be known are related and the śruti (which says) "from which, verily".

[161] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V018)
SANSKRIT: kośapratyakpraveśena pūrvapūrvaprahāṇataḥ । kārakādiniṣedhena hyupāyo brahmavedane
ENGLISH: By entering into the interior of the sheaths and by giving (them) up successively, by negating factors, etc., a means to the knowledge of Brahman (is attained).

[162] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V019)
SANSKRIT: avidyodbhūtatṛṣṇena puṃsā yatkalpitaṃ phalam । anantaphalasiddhyarthaṃ tadanūktiḥ pravṛttaye
ENGLISH: (The śruti) relates the fruit, figured by a man, whose thirst is caused by ignorance, to make (a man) active for the sake of establishing an infinite result.

[163] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V020)
SANSKRIT: kartuḥ karmāṇi kāryārthamanātmaphaladāni hi । puroktāni yato nāsāvanyathā'taḥ pravartate
ENGLISH: The ritual acts of the agent, which yield a result, which is not the Self, are mentioned previously for the sake of (obtaining a) result. Because (it is thus) one is therefore not active otherwise.

[164] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V022)
SANSKRIT: sādhyasādhanavadvākyaṃ tadviruddhārthasiddhaye । prāha brahmavidāpnoti śrutiḥ pratyakpraveśinī
ENGLISH: The śruti which leads (us) to the inner (Self) says: "He who knows Brahman, attains (the transcendent)", a proposition, containing end and means, in order to make evident something which is (in fact) incompatible with that (Brahman).

[165] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V024)
SANSKRIT: sādhyasādhanasambandhātprasaktā yeha doṣadhīḥ । sā caikarūpavijñānaśikhipluṣṭā vinaṅkṣyati
ENGLISH: So this erroneous cognition here, resulting from the combination of end and means, will perish, burnt by the fire of knowledge, which has one nature.

[166] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V025)
SANSKRIT: mā bhūdaṇvapi me duḥkhaṃ sukhyeva syāmahaṃ sadā । iti svato'bhilāṣo'yaṃ satyeva viṣaye bhavet
ENGLISH: "May no evil however small fall on me, may I always be prosperous", this wish will arise of its own accord with regard to a real object.

[167] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V026)
SANSKRIT: ajñātamokṣarūpo'pi kaivalyāya pravartate । alaṃ yathoktakāmeddhadhiṣaṇo bhavabhīṣitaḥ
ENGLISH: We are active for the sake of perfection, even if we do not know the real nature of release, when our mind is kindled by the desire as has been said (i.e. the desire for release) because of our fear of life.

[168] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V027)
SANSKRIT: pravṛttijanakaṃ yasmātsarvatraiva prayojanam । śrutirbrahmavidāpnotītyāha puṃsaḥ pralubdhaye
ENGLISH: Because an aim always generates activity, therefore the śruti says: "He who knows Brahman attains (the transcendent)" to kindle the desire of man.

[169] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V028)
SANSKRIT: phalaśrutyaṅkuśākṛṣṭaḥ śravaṇādau pravartate । tatpūrvakaṃ yato jñānaṃ śrutiścaivamabhāṣata
ENGLISH: He who is prompted by the goad—the mentioning of the result—is active with regard to hearing, etc., because the śruti says that knowledge is conditioned by this (hearing, etc.).

[170] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V029)
SANSKRIT: laukikī vaidikī cātha pravṛttiryeha kācana । narte prayojanaṃ yasmāttadevātaḥ pravṛttikṛt
ENGLISH: Because every (kind of) activity, secular or sacred, is (performed) here with an end, therefore just that (end) gives rise to that activity.

[171] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V030)
SANSKRIT: brahmavid brahma vettīha yaḥ sa āpnoti tatparam । satyādilakṣaṇaṃ brahma vakṣyate tadṛcā sphuṭam
ENGLISH: The Brahman-knower, (i.e.) the one who knows Brahman, attains that (Brahman), the transcendent Brahman, whose characteristics are "true being", etc., will be explained clearly by a verse about it (viz. Brahman).

[172] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V031)
SANSKRIT: phaloktiḥ paramāpnotītyāptā brahmaviducyate । sāmarthyād brahmavidyā tu parasyāvāptisādhanam
ENGLISH: The result is mentioned: "He attains the transcendent". The one who attains is called "He who knows Brahman". The knowledge of Brahman is the means of attaining the transcendent, as goes without saying.

[173] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V032)
SANSKRIT: svargaṃ yathā'gnihotreṇa yajamānaḥ prasādhayet । parāvāptiṃ tathā kuryād brahmavid brahmavidyayā
ENGLISH: Just as the sacrificer attains heaven by means of the agnihotram, so the knower of Brahman attains the transcendent through the knowledge of Brahman.

[174] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V033)
SANSKRIT: brahmaivātra paraṃ grāhyaṃ tajjñānaṃ nānyasiddhaye । anyajjñānaṃ hi nānyasya kvacidapyāptaye yataḥ
ENGLISH: The transcendent should be understood (to be) here, Brahman. The knowledge of this (Brahman) (is) not for the sake of establishing something else. For the knowledge of one thing is in no way a means of attaining another thing.

[175] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V034)
SANSKRIT: deśakālādisambhedapūrvikā'vāptiriṣyate । deśakālādyabhinnasya kathaṃ setyucyate yathā । sarvātmano'pyanāptiḥ syāddaśamasyeva mohajā
ENGLISH: Attaining is supposed (to be) conditioned by differentiation due to space, time, etc. How is that (attainment) of (something) which is not differentiated by space, time, etc., possible? (If this is asked then) it is answered as follows: Non-reaching of the universal Self is caused by delusion like (the non-reaching) of the tenth.

[176] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V035)
SANSKRIT: pañcasvannamayādyeṣu hyahamasmīti vibhramāt
ENGLISH: For with regard to the five (sheaths) consisting of food, etc., (one thinks) by mistake "I am (this)".

[177] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V036)
SANSKRIT: daśamo'smītyato jñānādajñānadhvastivartmanā । daśamāptivadāptiḥ syād brahmaṇo'jñānahānataḥ
ENGLISH: Like the reaching of the tenth through destroying the ignorance by the knowledge: "I am the tenth", (so) Brahman can be reached by getting rid of ignorance.

[178] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V037)
SANSKRIT: vibhinnavettṛvedyādau gauṇaṃ brahma yatastataḥ । abhinnavettṛvedyādi grāhyaṃ mukhyārthasiddhaye
ENGLISH: Because Brahman (is understood) indirectly when the knower, the object of knowledge, etc., are differentiated, it can be therefore understood as not differentiated into knower, object of knowledge, etc., to realize it directly.

[179] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V038)
SANSKRIT: anyadṛṣṭāvivāto'tra na niyogo manāgapi । mohapradhvaṃsamātreṇa nivṛtte rogahānivat
ENGLISH: Here is no command, however small, as in the case of contemplating something else, because the cessation (of ignorance) only (takes place) through the destruction of ignorance, like getting rid of a disease.

[180] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V039)
SANSKRIT: kartṛtāṃ pratyagāliṅgya yo'kartrātmānamīpsati । ulkāpiśācaṃ so'bhyeti śītārthaḥ pāvakecchayā
ENGLISH: He who inwardly clings to action (and yet) desires (to attain) the Self which is non-agent, (is like someone who) suffering from cold, follows a fiery demon in (his) longing for fire.

[181] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V040)
SANSKRIT: karomīti dhiyā cettadbrahmāsmīti hi labhyate । brūtālābhe'sya ko heturna hyato'nyo'styadarśanāt
ENGLISH: As a consequence of the cognition: “I am active” (the knowledge): “I am Brahman” is not acquired here. Tell me, what is the cause of its being beyond requirement? There is no other cause than ignorance (here adarśana).

[182] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V041)
SANSKRIT: tasmādavidyāsambhūtakartṛ pratyagavikriyam । avidyānarthatatkāryapratyākhyānena bodhyate
ENGLISH: Therefore (knowledge of) the inner (Self), free from change, whose activity is produced by ignorance, is imparted by eliminating the evil of ignorance and its products.

[183] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V042)
SANSKRIT: kartṛrjñāturhi yā dṛṣṭiḥ sāmānyādyarthasaṃśrayā । tatpratyagātmadṛṣṭyā tāṃ pratyākhyāyāśnute param
ENGLISH: He who by means of a vision of that inner Self has eliminated the (wrong) view, which is based on the sameness, etc., of agent and knower, reaches the transcendent.

[184] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V043)
SANSKRIT: aśeṣānandavallyarthasūtramādyamidaṃ vacaḥ । yasmāttasmāttadarthasya hyāviṣkṛdṛgudīryate
ENGLISH: Because this first proposition is a formula, (containing) the entire sense of the Ānandavallī, a verse is therefore added to clarify the meaning of it.

[185] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V044)
SANSKRIT: viśeṣaṇaviśeṣyatvātsatyādīnyata eva ca । catvāryekavibhaktīni nīlaraktotpalādivat
ENGLISH: For this very reason the four (words) "true being", etc., have the same case, since their relation is that of attribute (qualification) and of the thing attributed to (object qualified), like a blue-coloured lotus, etc.

[186] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V045)
SANSKRIT: vedyatvena yato brahma prādhānyena vivakṣitam । tasmādviśeṣyaṃ vijñeyaṃ tato'nyatsyādviśeṣaṇam
ENGLISH: Because Brahman is intended as the chief object to be known, therefore (it) should be understood (to be) the thing attributed to. What differs from it is the attribute.

[187] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V046)
SANSKRIT: nīlaṃ mahatsugandhīti viśiṃṣantyutpalaṃ yathā । ekādhikaraṇānyevaṃ satyādīni paraṃ mahat
ENGLISH: As the words "blue, big, fragrant" are attributed to the lotus, so the words "true being", etc., which are in syntactical agreement, are (attributed to) the transcendent, great (Brahman).

[188] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V047)
SANSKRIT: evaṃ vibhajyamānaṃ satsatyamityevamādibhiḥ । svaviśeṣaviruddhebhyo dharmibhyaḥ syānnirākṛtam
ENGLISH: Being thus distinguished (by attributes) like "true being", etc., (Brahman) is separated from bearers of properties, which (properties) are contrary to his own attributes.

[189] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V048)
SANSKRIT: evaṃ ca sati tajjñātaṃ yadanyebhyo'vadhāryate । nīlotpalādivadbrahma nānyathā'navadhāraṇāt
ENGLISH: This being the case, then Brahman, which is defined by other (attributes), is known, like a blue lotus, etc., (is known), not otherwise, for it is not defined (otherwise).

[190] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V049)
SANSKRIT: nanu vyabhicaradvastu syādviśeṣyaṃ viśeṣaṇaiḥ । brahmāntarādṛte tvatra kuto brūhi viśeṣyatā
ENGLISH: (Objection:) The thing attributed to is different from the attributes. Tell me, how can (Brahman) be attributed to here without (qualities) which differ from Brahman?

[191] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V050)
SANSKRIT: viśeṣaṇaviśeṣyatve sati doṣaḥ prasajyate । lakṣyalakṣaṇatāṃ yātu na doṣo'tra manāgapi
ENGLISH: (Refutation:) In the case of the relation between attribute and thing attributed to a fault would consequently arise. (The relation between attribute and thing attributed to,) however, should become a relation between the defined and the defining one. Then here no fault however small (arises).

[192] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V051)
SANSKRIT: anekātmaviśeṣyasthamāgṛhītaviśeṣyakam । sajātīyānnirākartṛ viśeṣaṇamihocyate
ENGLISH: That which accompanies something attributed to which has different peculiarities, which has something attributed to that is not yet understood, which separates from the same class, is called attribute here.

[193] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V052)
SANSKRIT: sāmānyetarasaṃyuktamanekaguṇasaṃyutam । sambhavyasambhaviguṇaṃ viśeṣyaṃ tatpracakṣate
ENGLISH: (That which is) connected with generality and particularity, (which is) provided with many properties, what has inherent as well as non-inherent properties, that is considered as the thing attributed to.

[194] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V053)
SANSKRIT: viśeṣyāntaraśeṣaṃ yastvaviśeṣyānyānyabuddhikṛt । parikalpitasambandhaṃ lakṣaṇaṃ bhāvalakṣaṇam
ENGLISH: (That which is) subordinate to something else (which is) attributed to, which makes comprehensible that, to which it is attributed (itself), as being different from (everything else) (and) which has a conceptual connection, (that is) the defining (element), (i.e.) that which defines something existent.

[195] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V054)
SANSKRIT: nirasyati yathaivaikaṃ tathaivānyadvirodhi yat । svātmanaivaikarūpeṇa lakṣyamatra nigadyate
ENGLISH: That which is defined by itself, invariable, that is related here just as it eliminates one thing, so it (eliminates everything) else that is opposed to it.

[196] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V055)
SANSKRIT: satyādayaḥ parārthatvāditaretaranispṛhāḥ । ekaikastvata evaiṣāṃ viśeṣyārthena badhyate
ENGLISH: (The words) "true being", etc., are not mutually dependent, for they imply something else. Each of these (words) is connected to the object it attributes (viz. Brahman).

[197] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V056)
SANSKRIT: sakṛtpramitarūpādyadrūpamanyatkadācana । naiva prapadyate satyaṃ tasmātkāryavilakṣaṇam
ENGLISH: (That which is) true being can change into no other form than the form which is once perceived. Therefore it is different from (everything) that can be produced.

[198] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V060)
SANSKRIT: tasmātsatyamanantaṃ yajjñānaṃ tadiha gṛhyate । bhāvasādhanamevātaḥ syādetadyuktidarśanāt
ENGLISH: Therefore that knowledge which is true being and infinite is spoken of here. For it is a verbal noun expressing the sense of the root, as is shown by reasoning.

[199] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V061.062)
SANSKRIT: jñānaṃ brahmeti vacanādantavattvamavāpa tat । jñānasya lokikasyeha hyantavattvasamanvayāt atastatpratiṣedhārthamanantamiti śabdyate । antaḥ sīmā tatheyattā tanniṣedhastvanantatā
ENGLISH: (Objection:) As a consequence of the proposition: "Brahman (is) knowledge" it follows undesirably that (Brahman) is finite. For there is an invariable connection between finiteness and worldly knowledge. (Refutation:) Just to exclude this (fault, viz. that Brahman would be finite) it is said: "infinite". "Finite" (means) "boundary" and "fixed measure". The exclusion from this is infinity.

[200] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V068)
SANSKRIT: na nīlavadanādāya nīladhīrupajāyate । viśeṣyajñānamapyevaṃ nāntareṇa viśeṣaṇam
ENGLISH: The cognition "blue" does not arise when something blue is not perceived. So the knowledge of something attributed to also is not (possible) without the attribute.

[201] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V069)
SANSKRIT: vākyārthānubhavo'smākaṃ nīlāderupajāyate । kiṃ nīlamiti cākāṅkṣā satyevamupapadyate
ENGLISH: In our opinion the comprehension of the meaning of a proposition arises from "blue", etc. This being the case, how is the expectation "blue" (etc.) possible?

[202] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V070)
SANSKRIT: pratyakṣato'vaseyatvādevaṃ sarvasya vastunaḥ । naivaṃ sādhayituṃ śakyaṃ kṣaṇikatvaṃ kathañcana
ENGLISH: The momentariness (of the knowledge of Brahman) can by no means be proved, because everything is ascertained thus by sensory perception (and is consequently not momentary).

[203] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V078)
SANSKRIT: svenārthenārthavāṃścātra brahmaśabdaḥ sahetaraiḥ । tatrānanto'ntavadvastuvyāvṛttyaiva viśeṣaṇam
ENGLISH: The word "Brahman" is meaningful here in its own sense together with the other (words, viz. "true being", etc.). Among them (the word) "infinite" is an attribute because it excludes a finite object.

[204] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V082)
SANSKRIT: na cedātmā paraṃ brahma svataḥ syādasya duḥkhinaḥ । niyogo vā'bhiyogo vā kaṃ viśeṣaṃ kariṣyati
ENGLISH: If the Self were not the transcendent Brahman, by nature, what difference would it make for the sufferer here, whether it is injunction or not.

[205] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V083)
SANSKRIT: paśyataḥ pratyagātmānamapaviddhānyavastunaḥ । ahaṃ brahmeti cejjñānaṃ śāstrādanyatparaṃ katham
ENGLISH: If the knowledge "I am Brahman" on account of authoritative texts (expounding the śruti) by him who beholds the inner Self and has gotten rid of (every) other object, how (could) the transcendent (then be) something other (than Brahman)?

[206] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V096)
SANSKRIT: yattu tadbrahmaṇo jñānaṃ sarvānanyadavikriyam । brahmaṇo'vyatiriktaṃ tatsarvapratyaksamāptitaḥ
ENGLISH: That knowledge is that of Brahman, which (knowledge) (is) identical to the All (and) unchangeable. It is not separated from Brahman, for it pervades the inner Self of all things.

[207] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V097)
SANSKRIT: pratyākhyātākhilānātmabhedasatyārthavācinā । tathaiva satyaśabdena lakṣyate tanna tūcyate
ENGLISH: Likewise it (Brahman) is defined by the words "true being", which express the sense of "true being", from which (being) every distinction (consisting of) non-Self is excluded. It (Brahman) however is not expressed.

[208] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V098)
SANSKRIT: evaṃ satyādayaḥ śabdāḥ svārthāsantyāginaḥ param । lakṣayanti viruddhārthanivṛttyā'jñānahānataḥ
ENGLISH: In this way the words "true being", etc., (though) retaining their own meaning define the transcendent (Brahman), for they remove ignorance by excluding a meaning opposite (to themselves).

[209] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V099)
SANSKRIT: nivartyabhedādbhinno'rtho'satyādyarthanivartinām । satyādīnāmataḥ siddhavākyārthatvamātmanaḥ
ENGLISH: (The words) "true being", etc., excluding the meaning "not true being", etc., have a meaning which is different from a difference which should be excluded. Hence it is established that the Self cannot become the content of a proposition.

[210] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V100)
SANSKRIT: yato vāco nivartante neti netīti cāparam । evaṃ satyarthavatsarvamanyathā tadanarthakam
ENGLISH: (The śruti says) “Whence words return”, “not thus, not thus”, and other (quotations from the śruti are possible). If this is (right), then all is meaningful, otherwise this is meaningless.

[211] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V101)
SANSKRIT: kauṭasthyaṃ satyamityuktaṃ tadguṇaṃ jñānamucyate । svato bodhasya kauṭasthye jñāturānantyamekatā
ENGLISH: (With the words) “true being” is meant: unchangeableness. “Knowledge” is said to have this (unchangeableness) as a property. When knowledge is unchangeable by nature, the knower is infinite and one.

[212] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V105)
SANSKRIT: tasmādāsannakartṛtvatimiro'yamavidyayā । satyādilakṣaṇaṃ brahma pratyaksthamapi nekṣate
ENGLISH: Therefore this (man), who is afflicted with the eye-disease of being an agent, does not see Brahman, defined by (the words) “true being”, etc., through ignorance, though it (Brahman) is within (him).

[213] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V106)
SANSKRIT: ato'vidyāniṣedhena sadā visphuritekṣaṇaḥ । pibaṃjñātrādinānātvaṃ pratyagātmānamīkṣate
ENGLISH: Hence by warding off ignorance, always seeing with the eyes widely opened, by absorbing the manifoldness of knower, etc., one sees the inner Self.

[214] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V107)
SANSKRIT: bhūtamātropasaṃśleṣasamutthaṃ yata ātmanaḥ । kartṛbhoktṛtvavijñānaṃ buddhau tannihitaṃ tataḥ
ENGLISH: Because the notion of the Self as agent (and) the one who experiences is caused by contact with matter only, therefore it is (thought to be) concealed within the mind.

[215] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V108)
SANSKRIT: tamorajovinirmuktatadvṛttyā copalabhyate । brahmāto nihitaṃ buddhau manasaiveti ca śrutiḥ
ENGLISH: By means of the activity of this (mind) he perceives Brahman, without darkness or passion, concealed within the mind. The śruti says: "Only through the mind (manas)".

[216] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V109)
SANSKRIT: nigūḍhamasyāṃ tadbrahma kāmāvidyādyupaplavāt । pratyagdhiyo'nupaśyanti tasmād buddhirguhocyate
ENGLISH: Those whose minds are turned inwards see Brahman as concealed in this (mind) through the confusion of desire, ignorance, etc. Therefore the mind is called "hiding-place".

[217] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V110)
SANSKRIT: paramaṃ vyoma hārdaṃ syādbāhyāttatparamaṃ yataḥ । śruteryo'yaṃ bahirdheti tacca buddheḥ samāśrayam
ENGLISH: "The highest space" is that of the heart, because (this space is) superior to (the space) without, for the śruti (says): "He who (is) outside". Moreover (this space) is the support of the mind.

[218] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V113)
SANSKRIT: tasmādupāyasiddhyarthaṃ buddheḥ pratyakpraveśanam । guhāyāṃ parame vyomañśrutirasmānato'nvaśāt
ENGLISH: Therefore the inward penetration of the mind is for the sake of (providing) a means (of knowledge). Hence the śruti ruled us within (with the words) "(in) the hiding-place, the highest space".

[219] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V114)
SANSKRIT: jñāturjñeyaṃ paraṃ brahma bhedabuddhyapanuttaye । guhāyāṃ parame vyomaṃ jñeyaṃ jñātari śiṣyate
ENGLISH: The transcendent Brahman is for the knower the object of knowledge (which is said to be) "(in) the hiding-place, the highest space" to remove the notion of difference. In the knower the object of knowledge remains.

[220] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V115)
SANSKRIT: sādhyasādhanasambandhavartmanaivānudhāvataḥ । sādhyasādhananirmuktaṃ svātmanyāviśate param
ENGLISH: By following the way, which is the connection of end and means, one attains the transcendent (Brahman), devoid of end and means, within oneself.

[221] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V119)
SANSKRIT: jñānādasatyādyucchitterātmano'nyanna vidyate । tasmādvipaścidbrahmabhyāṃ kāmānsarvānsahāśnute
ENGLISH: There exists nothing else but the Self, when (the notions) “not true being”, etc., are removed by knowledge. Therefore he attains the objects of his desires along with the wise and Brahman.

[222] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V123)
SANSKRIT: ādāvante tathā madhye dhiyo'nekaśarīragāḥ । nirviśeṣaikacidvyāptā hyananyānubhavātmanā
ENGLISH: In the beginning, middle and end, (there are) cognitions in different bodies, pervaded by the one unchangeable intelligence, (i.e.) by the Self, of which the intuition is (always) identical.

[223] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V124)
SANSKRIT: sarvapravṛttihetūṃśca yasmādbrahmavidaśnute । kāmānbrahmavidastasmānna pravṛttirahetutaḥ
ENGLISH: Because the one who knows Brahman attains the objects of all his desires, which are the causes of all activity, therefore the knower of Brahman is not active, for there is no reason (to be active).

[224] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V125)
SANSKRIT: avidyāhetavaḥ kāmāḥ kāmamūlāḥ pravṛttayaḥ । dharmādharmau ca tanmūlau deho'narthāśrayastataḥ
ENGLISH: Desires are caused by ignorance, activity is caused by desire, merit and demerit have their cause therein (i.e. in activity), from that (originates) the body, the seat of evil.

[225] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V126)
SANSKRIT: ato'vidyānirodhe syānnirodho viduṣaḥ sadā । niḥśeṣakarmahetūnāṃ vikārāṇāṃ tadaiva tu
ENGLISH: Hence, where ignorance is destroyed, the destruction of passions, the cause of all activity, always (ensues) for the one who knows.

[226] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V127)
SANSKRIT: kṛtsnopaniṣadarthasya sūtramityabhyadhātpurā । saṅkṣepatastadarthaśca samyaṅmantreṇa varṇitaḥ
ENGLISH: First (the Upaniṣad) gives a sūtram of the sense of the entire Upaniṣad. (After that) the sense of this (summary) is enunciated briefly through a suitable mantra.

[227] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V129)
SANSKRIT: satyaṃ jñānamanantaṃ ca rasādeḥ pañcakātparam । syāmadṛśyādiśāstroktamahaṃ brahmeti nirbhayam
ENGLISH: (Brahman, which is) true being, knowledge, infinite, (is) beyond the aggregate of five, (viz.) primary juice, etc. "May I be this fearless Brahman" as described in the śruti (through the words): "invisible", etc.

[228] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V131)
SANSKRIT: vastuto deśataścaiva kālataśca tridhocyate । ānantyaṃ brahmaṇaścātaḥ satyādyapi ca siddhyati
ENGLISH: The infinity of Brahman is related in three ways: with regard to ontological reality, space and time. Hence (the words) "true being", etc., are proved also (to be true).

[229] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V134)
SANSKRIT: kālākāśādiyonitvātsarvātmatvāttathā''tmanaḥ । vastvantarasya cāsattvānmukhyānantyaṃ parātmanaḥ
ENGLISH: The transcendent Self is pre-eminently infinite, because it is the source of time, space, etc., and because the Self is the essence of all being and because no other ontological reality exists.

[230] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V135)
SANSKRIT: kalpitena paricchedo na hyakalpitavastunaḥ । kalpitaśceha kālādirvācārambhaṇaśāstrataḥ
ENGLISH: Limitation of an ontological reality which is uncreated by something that is created (by that ontological reality) is impossible. In this case "time", etc., are created, for the śruti (says): "based on speech".

[231] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V140)
SANSKRIT: sarvānanyāvikāryekamakāryākāraṇaṃ param । brahmasvabhāvamālambya sṛṣṭirvaktuṃ na śakyate
ENGLISH: Basing oneself on the fact that the nature of Brahman is identical to the All, unchanging, unique (without a second), product nor cause, the transcendent, it is impossible to speak of creation.

[232] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V141)
SANSKRIT: brahmaṇo'nyadataḥ sarvaṃ kāryatvena vivakṣyate । brahmaṇo'kāraṇatvācca sṛṣṭau hetorasambhavaḥ
ENGLISH: Because everything other than Brahman is denoted as a product, and because Brahman is no cause, a cause of creation is impossible.

[233] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V144)
SANSKRIT: nedānīmadvitīyatvātkauṭasthyādātmanaḥ sadā । bhaviṣyatyastyabhūnnāto vastuvṛttamapekṣya tu
ENGLISH: Nor (is there a creation) now, because there exists no second (besides Brahman) and because the Self is always unchangeable. Hence there will be, is (and) was no (creation) with regard to ontological reality.

[234] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V145)
SANSKRIT: bhaviṣyatyastyabhūcceti yato vandhyaṃ viśeṣaṇam । uṣṭrādivadaṇostasmādavidyaivātra kāraṇam
ENGLISH: Because (the words) "it will be, is (and) was" are a senseless predicate, like (the words) "camel", etc., (are a senseless predicate) of an atom, therefore only ignorance is the cause here.

[235] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V146)
SANSKRIT: asataḥ kāraṇaṃ nāsti sato'natiśayatvataḥ । kauṭasthyājjanmanāśānāmanavasthā janerjanau
ENGLISH: There is no cause for something non-existent, (there is also no cause) for something existent, because it has no special qualities (and) coming into being and passing away are invariable. (Otherwise there would result) an endless regression of production within production.

[236] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V147)
SANSKRIT: kālatrayasyāvidyāyāḥ samutthānādahetutā । karmadeveśvarādīnāmata evānimittatā
ENGLISH: Because the three times are originated from ignorance there is no cause (of creation). Hence ritual acts, the divine Lord, etc., are (likewise) no cause (of creation, because they are originated from ignorance).

[237] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V149)
SANSKRIT: anādimadhyanidhanāvidyāsandūṣitātmanaḥ । brahmaṇo jāyate vyoma timirādiva candramāḥ
ENGLISH: From Brahman, whose nature is corrupted by ignorance, which (ignorance) is without beginning, middle or end, the space is produced, like the moon (is produced) from an eye-disease.

[238] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V150)
SANSKRIT: nālaṃ kṣaṇamapi sthātuṃ kāryaṃ taddhruvatā kutaḥ । rajjveva bhogyavidyotthaṃ mūḍhadṛṣṭerdhruvāyate
ENGLISH: An effect cannot remain even for a moment. From where (then) its permanence? Like a serpent, originated by means of a rope from ignorance passes for something immovable in the sight of a confused man.

[239] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V151)
SANSKRIT: timiropapluto yadvadbhinnamiva samīkṣate । candrikāmātmanastadvatkāryaṃ bhinnaṃ samīkṣate
ENGLISH: Just as (a man, whose eyes are) affected by an eye-disease sees a separate (i.e. a second besides the original one) moon as it were, so an effect is seen as different from the Self.

[240] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V154)
SANSKRIT: pañcaivakhalu bhūtāni vyomādīnyupalakṣayet । kāryakāraṇarūpeṇa bhūtebhyo nānyadiṣyate
ENGLISH: (The Upanisad) indeed distinguishes only five elements, (viz.) space, etc. (For) nothing other than these elements are considered as product (and) cause.

[241] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V157)
SANSKRIT: satyaṃ jñānamanantaṃ yatpratyajñāyi puraikalam । ananyānubhavaṃ brahma tatsiddhaṃ nyāyataḥ sphuṭam
ENGLISH: Brahman, which was formerly asserted (to be) true being, knowledge, infinite, unique and of which the intuition is (always) identical, is established now clearly and rightly (as being such).

[242] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V158)
SANSKRIT: digādikaraṇo devaḥ pañcabhūtaśarīrabhṛt । sarvo'smītyabhimāneddho virāḍevamajāyata
ENGLISH: God, cause of the regions of the universe, etc., whose body consists of the five elements, kindled by the delusion "I am (this) All", thus has become Virāj.

[243] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V163)
SANSKRIT: vṛṣṭyādisavyapekṣāyā bhuvaḥ pañcaguṇātmikāḥ । vrīhiprabhṛtayaḥ sarvā bhavantyoṣadhayaḥ kramāt
ENGLISH: All herbs, like rice, etc., which consist of the five elements, originate successively from the earth, which is dependent on rain, etc.

[244] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V164)
SANSKRIT: adanārhaṃ tathā'nnaṃ ca tābhyaḥ samabhijāyate । jagdhādannādrasotpattiḥ śoṇitaṃ jāyate rasāt
ENGLISH: Then from these (herbs) originates food, fit for eating. From food, when eaten, is produced the primary juice. From the primary juice blood is produced.

[245] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V166)
SANSKRIT: nijāvidyāmahājālasaṃvītadhiṣaṇaḥ pumān । mohotthānalakāmākhyabaḍiśāpahatāśayaḥ
ENGLISH: The mind of the human being, whose understanding is covered by the mighty net of innate ignorance, is carried off by the hook called desire (which is) a fire, originating in want of discrimination.

[246] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V175)
SANSKRIT: parātmano'pyanantasya kṣetrajñatvamavidyayā । kṣetrajñaṃ cāpi māṃ viddhītyevaṃ satyupapadyate
ENGLISH: Though the supreme Self (is) infinite, (it is) through ignorance (thought to be) the knower of the field. If this is so, then also (the words) “Know me to be the knower of the field” are possible.

[247] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V176)
SANSKRIT: na jānāmītyavidyaikā'nityā tatkāraṇaṃ matā । svaprasiddhyaiva sā sidhyenniśaulūkīva vāsare
ENGLISH: “I do not know”, (this) ignorance, one, finite, is thought (to be) the cause thereof. It (i.e. ignorance) is established of its own accord, like the night (is self-established to) the owl by day.

[248] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V178)
SANSKRIT: anātmetīha yadbhāti tadavidyāvijṛmbhitam । tasmādavidyā sā'pyuktā vidyā tvātmaikarūpiṇī
ENGLISH: What appears here as non-Self is a manifestation of ignorance. Therefore (it is) right (to assume the existence of) ignorance. Knowledge, however, is exclusively of the nature of the Self.

[249] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V179)
SANSKRIT: ātmāgrahātirekeṇa tasyā rūpaṃ na vidyate । amitravadavidyeti satyevaṃ ghaṭate sadā
ENGLISH: The nature of it (i.e. ignorance) does not exist separated from the non-perceiving of the Self. If this is so, (the words) "Ignorance (is) like an ennemy" are always appropriate.

[250] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V180)
SANSKRIT: tasmātsadasadityādirvikalpo mūḍhacetasām । nirūpyamāṇo nirvāti na vedmītyagrahātmani
ENGLISH: Therefore, the false notion "being, non-being", etc., of those whose mind is confused, ceases to exist, if examined with reference to (ignorance), whose nature is the non-perceiving (of the Self, as is obvious from the words:) "I do not know".

[251] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V181)
SANSKRIT: tayā saṃvītacitto'yaṃ tyaktvā dehaṃ purātanam । liṅgātmā praviśedyoniṃ karmādimaruteritaḥ
ENGLISH: This subtle body, whose understanding is covered by this (ignorance), having abandoned the former body, goes into a womb, urged on by the wind of karma.

[252] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V182)
SANSKRIT: annamambhastathā tejo bhuktaṃ pratyekaśastridhā । trivṛtkṛtaṃ tathaikaikaṃ pariṇāmaṃ prapadyate
ENGLISH: Food, water and heat are absorbed one by one threefold. In the same way everything is made threefold (and everything) partakes in the development.

[253] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V221)
SANSKRIT: mṛtibījaṃ bhavejjanma janmabījaṃ tathā mṛtiḥ । ghaṭīyantravadaśrānto bambhramītyaniśaṃ naraḥ
ENGLISH: Birth is the germ of death, death is the germ of birth. A man roams about unwearied, incessantly like the wheel of a water-mill.

[254] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V224)
SANSKRIT: ityādyā vikriyāḥ sarvā liṅgadehasamāśrayāḥ । atadvānapi saṃmohāttadvānityabhimanyate
ENGLISH: All changes, these and those which follow, are based on the subtle and (gross) bodies. Though one does not possess these, one thinks to possess these on account of delusion.

[255] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V225)
SANSKRIT: jñātāsmītyabhimānāddhi ceṣṭate jñānakarmaṇi । mantā'smīti tato mohātkurute mānasīḥ kriyāḥ
ENGLISH: Through the misconception: "I am a knower" one is occupied with knowledge and action. Through the error: "I am a thinker" one performs mental activity.

[256] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V226)
SANSKRIT: prāṇādyātmābhimānena karmaceṣṭāṃ prapadyate । cakṣurādyabhimānī ca rūpādyālocanāparaḥ
ENGLISH: Through the misconception that vital air, etc., are the Self one is engaged in activity. If one considers oneself erroneously to be the eyes, etc., one is wrapped up in the seeing of forms, etc.

[257] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V227)
SANSKRIT: tathā dehasya dāhādau dagdho'smīti ca manyate । śyāmo'smīti ca dehasya śyāmatvaṃ manyate'budhaḥ
ENGLISH: So, if the body is burnt, etc., the fool thinks: "I am burnt". (Thinking) "I am black" he identifies himself with the blackness of his own body.

[258] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V228)
SANSKRIT: godhanādyabhimānena tadvānasmītyavidyayā । brahmacārī gṛhastho'haṃ tāpaso'smi tathā muniḥ । dehaliṅgātmasaṃskārānmanyate saṅgakāraṇāt
ENGLISH: Through the erroneous identification with the possession of cows, etc., (one thinks) on account of ignorance: "I possess this". As a consequence of attachment one identifies oneself (erroneously) with the consecrations of the body and the subtle self, as chaste student, a householder, an ascetic or a hermit.

[259] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V229)
SANSKRIT: bhinnātmanāṃ tu bhūtānāṃ śarīraṃ kāryamucyate । mamāhamiti sammohādanarthaṃ pratipadyate
ENGLISH: The body of beings, whose Self is separated, is called a product. They fall into evil through the delusive thought: "(This is) mine, I (am this)".

[260] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V232)
SANSKRIT: taruśākhāgradṛṣṭyaiva somaṃ yadvatpradarśayet । niṣkośaṃ kośadṛṣṭyaiva pratīci brahma darśyate
ENGLISH: Like one shows the moon by pointing to the end of a branch of a tree, so Brahman is shown, sheathless, in the inner (Self) just by pointing to the sheaths.

[261] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V233)
SANSKRIT: anādāviha saṃsāre vāsanārañjitā matiḥ । pratīcyupāyataḥ kartuṃ śakyā tasmātsa ucyate
ENGLISH: Here, in the saṃsāra, which is without beginning, the mind, affected by latent (subconscious) residues, can (only) indirectly be bent upon the inner (Self). Therefore this is said.

[262] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V234)
SANSKRIT: dvaitāspṛkpratyagātmaikaḥ pratīcīva parāgapi । yuṣmadasmadvibhāgābhyāṃ bhidyate'vidyayā mṛṣā
ENGLISH: Like the inner Self, being one, does not touch duality with regard to the inner, (so) also the outward (Self). (The inner Self) is split wrongly (from the outward Self) through ignorance on account of the difference between the outer and the inner world.

[263] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V239)
SANSKRIT: vedārthaviṣayā buddhirvijñānaṃ niścayātmakam । jñānakarmābhinirvṛtta ānandaḥ phalalakṣaṇaḥ
ENGLISH: Understanding (means) the mind, whose object is the sense of the Veda (and) whose nature is determining. Bliss, resulting from knowledge and action, (is) characterized by result.

[264] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V240)
SANSKRIT: trīṇyevānnāni caitāni prājāpatyāni sarvaśaḥ । prāṇo manastathā vākca virāḍannātmatāṃ gataḥ
ENGLISH: These here are the three foods of Prajāpati altogether: vital air, mind (manas) and voice. Virāj is the essence of food.

[265] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V243)
SANSKRIT: śiro mūrdhā bhujau pakṣāvātmā kāyaśca madhyamaḥ । śeṣaṃ pucchamitijñeyaṃ citimevaṃ vicintayet
ENGLISH: "Head" (means) "skull". "The two sides" (are) "the two arms". "Ātman" (means) "torso", being in the middle. So "the lower part" must be known (to be) "what remains". Thus one may consider this laying.

[266] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V247)
SANSKRIT: śrutyantarādvā samprāptaṃ mokṣādarvākphalāya tu । tadanūdya paraṃ śreyaḥ prāptaye jñānamucyate
ENGLISH: Or, on the strength of another śruti (the meditation) (is) attained for the sake of a result before release. Therefore, insisting upon the highest bliss, the knowledge (of the sheaths) is mentioned to attain (this highest bliss).

[267] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V250)
SANSKRIT: avidyayā'tadarho'pi rajjuḥ sarpātmatāmiva । kośapañcakatāṃ yātastamanukrośatīva hi
ENGLISH: Though entitled (to do) this (the inner Self) has become the fivefold nature of the sheaths on account of ignorance, like a rope the nature of snake. (The inner Self) shows as it were compassion for him.

[268] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V272)
SANSKRIT: tena prāṇamayenaiṣa pūrṇo rajjveva pannagaḥ । kāryato'nnamayaḥ klṛpto vācārambhaṇaśāstrataḥ
ENGLISH: Through this (sheath) consisting of vital air (the body) is filled like a snake by a rope. (The sheath) consisting of food is formed (likewise), because it is a product on account of the śruti (which says): "based on speech".

[269] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V285)
SANSKRIT: mithyātmanāṃ hi sarveṣāṃ satyādiguṇalakṣaṇam । vyāviddhāśeṣasaṃsāramātmānaṃ taṃ pracakṣmahe
ENGLISH: The Self, characterized by the properties "true being", etc., belonging to all those whose self is false, this (Self) we regard as the Self, which is contrary to the entire saṃsāra.

[270] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V286)
SANSKRIT: na hyātmavānbhavetsarpo daṇḍādyadhyāsarūpiṇā । ātmanā'vitathenaiva sarpo rajjvātmanā''tmavān
ENGLISH: Through the false nature, formed by the superimposition (of a serpent) on a staff, etc., the serpent has a nature because of the nature of the rope. The serpent has no real nature.

[271] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V309)
SANSKRIT: śraddhayā uttamāṅgatvaṃ smṛtiraśraddhayeti ca
ENGLISH: Faith is the most important part, also on account of the smṛti (which says): "through want of faith".

[272] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V310)
SANSKRIT: satyaṃ hi śraditi prāhurdhatte dhīḥ pratyagātmani । tadyatastāṃ mahātmānaḥ śraddhāmityūcire dhiyam
ENGLISH: They say that "real" means "faith". Understanding places this (faith) in the inner Self, for the most eminent ones used to call that understanding "faith".

[273] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V329)
SANSKRIT: na cātmanā svātmānamupasaṅkrāmatīśvaraḥ । nālaṃ svaskandhamāroḍhuṃ nipuṇo'pīha sādhakaḥ
ENGLISH: The Lord cannot pass into himself. No performer (acrobat), no matter how agile, can here (i.e. in daily life) mount on his own shoulder.

[274] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V338)
SANSKRIT: brahmatā''nandarūpasya kena vā pratiṣidhyate । nirastāśeṣabhedasya rūpaṃ tatparamātmanaḥ
ENGLISH: What can prevent (that) which is of the nature of bliss from being Brahman? This is the nature of the highest Self, free from all differences.

[275] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V339)
SANSKRIT: priyādyānandarūpāṇāṃ bhedo yatra nivartate । amanoviṣaye'tyantaṃ tamānandaṃ pracakṣmahe
ENGLISH: Where this differentiation of the forms of bliss, as pleasure, etc., ends—for it is no object of the mind—(there) we call this complete bliss.

[276] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V340)
SANSKRIT: kośapañcaka etasminniṣiddhe'jñānahetuke । nā''nandamayatā nyāyyā dhiyāṃ vācāmagocare
ENGLISH: Where this (differentiation), consisting of the five sheaths caused by ignorance is removed, there (the sheath) consisting of bliss with regard to (Brahman, that is) unattainable by mind and words, is out of the question.

[277] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V346)
SANSKRIT: utkṛṣyamāṇa ānando niṣṭhāṃ yatrādhigacchati । tadekaṃ sakalaṃ brahma pucchaṃ sarvāśrayatvataḥ
ENGLISH: Where the superior bliss attains the state of perfection that is that one, complete Brahman, the foundation, for (Brahman) is the ultimate basis of all.

[278] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V347)
SANSKRIT: ānandaḥ para evātmā bhedasaṃsargavarjitaḥ । sa eva sukharūpeṇa vyajyate puṇyakarmabhiḥ
ENGLISH: The "Self", free from separation and contact, is the highest bliss. It becomes manifest in the form of happiness through virtuous acts.

[279] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V355)
SANSKRIT: asadbhyaḥ khalu kośebhyaḥ sadekaṃ brahma veda cet । dṛśe rūpāntarāsattvātsantaṃ taṃ brāhmaṇā viduḥ
ENGLISH: He who knows Brahman (to be) being (and) one, through the sheaths which are non-being, is regarded by the Brahmans as being, for it has no other form than sight.

[280] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V356)
SANSKRIT: yasmādevamato hitvā kośānajñānakalpitān । nirvikāramanādyantaṃ paramātmānamāśrayet
ENGLISH: Because (this is) so, he therefore attains the highest Self, unchangeable, without beginning (or) end, after putting away the sheaths, feigned by ignorance.

[281] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V361)
SANSKRIT: sādhāraṇaṃ paraṃ brahma viduṣo'viduṣaśca cet । prāptyaprāptī same syātāṃ niyame hetvasambhavāt
ENGLISH: If the transcendent Brahman were common to the one who knows and the one who does not know, attaining and non-attaining (of Brahman) would be the same, since there would be no reason for a fixed rule.

[282] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V369)
SANSKRIT: asataścedidaṃ kāryaṃ sarvaṃ syādasadanvitam । asataḥ kāraṇatvaṃ ca nirātmatvānna siddhyati
ENGLISH: (Objection:) All this, being connected with non-being, may be the product of something non-existent. (Refutation:) That something non-existent could be a cause is not proved, for it has no own nature at all.

[283] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V371)
SANSKRIT: sāvidyaḥ pratyagātmā yo viyadyoniḥ puroditaḥ । so'kāmayata nāvidyāṃ vinā kāmo'sti kasyacit
ENGLISH: The inner Self, afflicted with ignorance, the cause of space, (as) previously related, "he had desire". For without ignorance no one has desire.

[284] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V372)
SANSKRIT: ālātasyaikarūpasya vaiśvarūpyaṃ yathānyataḥ । rūpābhidhānabhrāntyutthā bahuteyaṃ parātmanaḥ । prajāyeyetyato vakti nāmarūpātmanā prabhuḥ
ENGLISH: Like a torch, which, though having one form, (displays) multiformness by virtue of something else, so the multiplicity of the highest Self is originated by the delusion of name and form. The Lord says: "May I bring forth" by the nature of name and form.

[285] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V373.374)
SANSKRIT: ātmasthe nāmarūpe ye deśakālādyapekṣiṇī । jagatkarmavaśādīśād vyajyete bahudhātmanaḥ vyākṛtiryā tayorviṣṇoḥ pratyahaṃ nāmarūpayoḥ । bhūyo bhavanametatsyānmāyino'nekatā yathā
ENGLISH: Name and form, residing in the Self, become, dependent on space, time, etc., manifest from the Self, the Lord, by force of deeds performed (by the beings in) the world in many ways. This daily manifestation of both name and form from Viṣṇu is the "becoming" world, like the multiplicity (conjured up) by a magician.

[286] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V375)
SANSKRIT: na hyanavayavasyāsya bahutvaṃ yujyate'ñjasā । tasmādbhāktaṃ bahutvaṃ syād vyomno yadvad ghaṭādibhiḥ
ENGLISH: For multiplicity of something without parts is not correct; therefore multiplicity is secondary like (the multiplicity) of space in pots, etc.

[287] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V378)
SANSKRIT: māyāvī jagadutpādya māyayaiveśvareśvaraḥ । sarpādīnkalpitānsragvattadevānuviveśa saḥ
ENGLISH: The supreme God, endowed with illusive power, having created the world through his illusive power, enters into it, like a garland (enters into) feigned snakes, etc.

[288] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V384)
SANSKRIT: vyāpi vā'vyāpi vā kāryaṃ vyāpnotyeva hi kāraṇam । na hyātmaśūnyo deśo'sti yaṃ jīvenā''viśetparaḥ
ENGLISH: The cause pervades the product, be it pervading or non-pervading. There exists no place void of the Self which (place) the highest (Self) (does not) enter "by the incarnate soul".

[289] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V398)
SANSKRIT: prakāśātmaka etasmindraṣṭṛśrotrādilakṣaṇam । mohādīkṣāmahe yasmātpraviṣṭastena kalpyate
ENGLISH: Because in this (hiding-place, consisting of understanding,) the nature of which is light, we perceive through ignorance characterized by (the notions) seer, hearer, etc., therefore it is thought to be entered.

[290] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V402)
SANSKRIT: mūrtāmūrtātmakaṃ kāryaṃ yatsṛṣṭvā prāviśatprabhuḥ । rajataṃ śuktikaivātmā tadātmevābhavanmṛṣā
ENGLISH: The Lord, having created the product, whose nature is material and non-material, entered into (it). The Self assumes untruly, as it were, the nature of it (the product) as mother of pearl (becomes) silver.

[291] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V407)
SANSKRIT: vyāvahārikamevātra satyaṃ syādadhikārataḥ । pāramārthikasatyasya vākyānte samudīraṇāt
ENGLISH: "Real" may be here: "relating to phenomenal existence" on the strength of (what preceded in) this context, for "real" relating to the supreme truth is said at the end of the proposition.

[292] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V408)
SANSKRIT: mṛgatṛṣṇādivanmithyā tadihānṛtamucyate । ityetadabhavatsraṣṭā hyavidyotthamavidyayā
ENGLISH: That which is not in reality, like a mirage, etc., is called "untrue" here. Hence through ignorance the creator became this, viz. which has arisen from ignorance.

[293] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V409)
SANSKRIT: pratyākhyānena sarvasya sattyadādyātmakasya hi । vyāvṛttākhilanānātvamahaṃ brahmeti bodhyate
ENGLISH: By rejecting everything which has the nature of sad, tyad, etc., the complete liberation from all difference is communicated by (the words) "I (am) Brahman".

[294] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V410)
SANSKRIT: naitadasti na nāstīdaṃ dvayormohodbhavatvataḥ । na sattannāsadityevaṃ prāha viśveśvaro'pi hi
ENGLISH: (It is) not (right to say:) "this is", (it is) also not (right to say) "this is not", for both (alternatives) originate from delusion. For "This is neither being, nor non-being" (in the sense of phenomenal) said the Lord of the universe.

[295] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V411)
SANSKRIT: āvirbhāvatirobhāvau buddheryatsākṣikāviha । tamekamantarātmānaṃ vidyādavyabhicāriṇam
ENGLISH: One should know this, by whom the appearance and disappearance of the mental activity are witnessed here, (to be) the one, interior, unchangeable Self.

[296] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V412)
SANSKRIT: tasmādasti paraṃ brahma yasyāvidyāprakalpitāḥ । santīva sattāmālambya kāryakāraṇalakṣaṇāḥ
ENGLISH: Therefore the transcendent Brahman exists. By taking recourse to its existence (those things) which are feigned by ignorance and are characterized by (the relation of) product and cause exist as it were (seem to exist).

[297] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V413)
SANSKRIT: vivādagocarāpannaṃ yatkiñcidracanātmakam । tatsarvaṃ buddhimatpūrvaṃ tadātmatvād ghaṭādivat
ENGLISH: Anything whatever is capable of being discussed (and) has the nature of production (or arrangement) presupposes something intelligent, because it has the nature of that (production or arrangement) like a pot, etc.

[298] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V416)
SANSKRIT: nāmarūpātmakaṃ kāryamanātmatvātsvato hyasat । yatsadekaṃ paraṃ brahma tato vai sadajāyata
ENGLISH: The product has the nature of name and form, by (being) non-existent itself, for it has no (own) essence. From Brahman, which (is) existent, one, transcendent, verily (this product) is generated as existent.

[299] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V417)
SANSKRIT: satyaṃ jñānamanantaṃ yattadupetamavidyayā । svātmanaiva svamātmānaṃ sattyadrūpamacīklṛpat
ENGLISH: That which is true being, knowledge, infinite, supplied with ignorance, brought about its own nature independently, consisting of sat and tyat.

[300] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V427)
SANSKRIT: apaviddhaiṣaṇāstadvadbāhyopādānavarjitāḥ । niḥsambodhaṃ parānandaṃ prāptāḥ saṃnyāsino'malāḥ
ENGLISH: So the pure ascetics, having renounced wishes, free from clinging to external objects, who have reached the unimpaired, the highest bliss, (are in a condition of satisfaction).

[301] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V433)
SANSKRIT: ābrahmastambaloke'sminpuṇyakarmānurūpataḥ । ānandaḥ paramo yasmādānandayati naḥ sadā
ENGLISH: For in this world from Brahman to a clump of grass the highest bliss always gladdens us according to meritorious deeds.

[302] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V436)
SANSKRIT: vidvānevaiti tadbrahma hyabhayaṃ bhayahetu yat । tamomātrāvaruddhatvāttatprāpternānyadasti hi
ENGLISH: Only the one who knows attains Brahman, which is the cause of fear, (though) without fear, for the attaining of it (Brahman) is obstructed by ignorance only. For there is no other (hindrance).

[303] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V437)
SANSKRIT: vyavadhānaṃ hi yadyasmāttattanmohaikahetukam । yasmāttasmādavidyaiva mokṣāptervyavadhirbhavet
ENGLISH: Because that which separates from it (Brahman) is only caused by ignorance of it, therefore ignorance is the only hindrance for attaining release.

[304] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V438)
SANSKRIT: avidyāsākṣyapi pratyaksadā'nastamitoditaḥ । avidyayā vyavahitastadbalenaiva tadvacaḥ
ENGLISH: The inner Self, never vanishing or appearing, (though) witness of ignorance is obstructed by ignorance. On the strength of that that is said.

[305] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V440)
SANSKRIT: yātu sādhāraṇī prāptirātmatvādbrahmaṇaḥ svataḥ । viduṣo'viduṣo vā'sāvasmābhirna niyamyate
ENGLISH: (If it is said that) the attaining (of Brahman) is common to the one who knows and the one who does not know, because Brahman is the Self by nature, (then) that is not rejected by us.

[306] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V459)
SANSKRIT: sadā labdhātmakasyāpi yato'jñānamanāptikṛt । avādyuccairataḥ śrutyā vidvānetīti sādaram
ENGLISH: Because ignorance always causes non-attaining, even though the Self is attained, it is stated emphatically and respectfully by the śruti: "The one who knows attains".

[307] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V460)
SANSKRIT: yasmādevaṃ tato'vidvāllabhate na tamīśvaram । avidyāvyavadhānāddhi labdha eva na labhyate
ENGLISH: Because (it is) so, the one who does not know does not attain God. For through the cover of ignorance even the attained is not attained.

[308] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V463)
SANSKRIT: avidyayā tadoddhṛtya rajjvā rajjumiva svayam । ahitvenādvayādbodhātkurute kartṛbhoktṛbhiḥ
ENGLISH: Just as a cord by separating itself from the cord (i.e. its real self) through ignorance, makes itself a serpent, so (the transmigratory being by separating himself) from the consciousness, (which is) without a second, (makes himself) agent (and) enjoyer.

[309] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V464)
SANSKRIT: araṃ chidraṃ bhidā'nyatvaṃ vedyavettṛtvalakṣaṇam । yasmādutkurute mohādātmano brahmaṇaḥ svataḥ
ENGLISH: "Aram" (means here) a splitting, a separation, (i.e.) a difference, appearing as thing to be known and knower. "Ud-": because one does away with (the identity of) the Self and Brahman by oneself through delusion.

[310] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V476)
SANSKRIT: yasyāmataṃ tasya mataṃ mataṃ yasya na veda saḥ । viditāviditābhyāṃ tadanyadeveti hi śrutiḥ
ENGLISH: “By whomsoever it is not understood, by him it is understood. By whomsoever it is understood, he does not understand”. “It is different from what is known or not known”, thus says the śruti.

[311] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V477)
SANSKRIT: anyadeva hi tadvedyādavedyādanyadeva tat । vedyavettṛdvayāccānyaditi śrutyanuśāsanam
ENGLISH: It is different from the object of knowledge, it is different from the non-object of knowledge; it is different from both the object of knowledge and the knower", thus is the teaching of the śruti.

[312] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V479)
SANSKRIT: vyutthāpya vedyādvidyāyā vettuścājñānakalpitāt । tadanyebhyaśca jānīyādahaṃ brahmetivākyataḥ
ENGLISH: Arising above the thing to be known, knowledge and knower, which are feigned by ignorance, and above their opposites, one knows (Brahman) on account of the proposition: "I am Brahman".

[313] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V492)
SANSKRIT: yeyaṃ sātiśayā saṅkhyā'saṅkhyeyārthāvasāyinī । yathaivamasmadānandaḥ syātparānandaniṣṭhitaḥ
ENGLISH: Just as here (i.e. in this world) a number which is relative defines an incalculable object, so our bliss may partake in the highest bliss.

[314] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V500)
SANSKRIT: bāhyairādhyātmikaiścaiva sampannaḥ sādhanaiḥ pumān । labhate yamasau hlādaṃ narānandaḥ sa ucyate
ENGLISH: That pleasure which a man, provided with external and personal means, obtains, is called the bliss of a man.

[315] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V535)
SANSKRIT: utkṛṣṭirvā'pakṛṣṭirvā neha svātmani vidyate । tamopahatadṛṣṭīnāmutkarṣetaravīkṣaṇam
ENGLISH: Superiority or inferiority does not exist in one's own Self. The seeing of superiority and inferiority is characteristic of those whose sight is affected by ignorance.

[316] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V543)
SANSKRIT: vidvattāvyatirekeṇa phalaṃ bhinnaṃ yathā tathā । akāmahatatāyāstu parānando na bhidyate
ENGLISH: Just as the result is not separated from the possession of knowledge, so the highest bliss is not separated from freedom from desire.

[317] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V556)
SANSKRIT: daśamāptivadajñānātsvarūpādiva varṇyate । vidyayā tadavāpnoti yadanāptamavidyayā
ENGLISH: Just as (in the case of) the reaching of the tenth. On account of ignorance one is regarded as it were (to be different) from one's own nature. What is not reached by ignorance, that one reaches by knowledge.

[318] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V560)
SANSKRIT: buddhaṃ yasmātsvatastattvamataḥ śuddhaṃ svato bhavet । ato muktaṃ svato brahma vada syātkarmaṇā'tra kim
ENGLISH: Because truth is understood of its own accord, (it is) pure by nature. Hence Brahman is released by nature. Tell me, what is the use of ritual acts here?

[319] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V561)
SANSKRIT: sraṣṭṛpraveṣṭroścaikatvādabhinnaḥ syātparādbudhaḥ । vipaścidvyatirekeṇa yadīśo'nyo na vidyate । tataḥ syādabhayaprāptirdvitīyādvai bhayaśruteḥ
ENGLISH: Because the creator and the one who enters are one, the wise is not separated from the transcendent (Brahman). Because there exists no other God besides the wise (Vipaścit), the reaching of safety (is) therefore (possible), because the śruti (says): “Fear, verily, (arises) from a second”.

[320] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V563.564)
SANSKRIT: yadi taimirikādanyairdvitīyo nekṣyate śaśī candra eka iti jñānaṃ tadā syātpāramārthikam । tadgṛhyate dvitīyaṃ cenna suṣupte'grahaḥ śruteḥ
ENGLISH: If no second moon is seen by others than by the one who is suffering from an eye-disease, then the knowledge: “(There is) one moon (only)” is true. (Objection:) The second is still perceived. (Refutation:) (This is) not (true). In deep sleep there is no perception (of a second) on account of the śruti.

[321] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V565)
SANSKRIT: na cehānyamanastā syātsarveṣāmagraho yataḥ । astyevaitaddvitīyaṃ ced grahaṇātsvapnabodhayoḥ
ENGLISH: And the mind (*manas*) is not directed on something else in this case, for nothing is perceived at all. (Objection:) There exists a second, for it is perceived in dream and deep sleep.

[322] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V566)
SANSKRIT: avidyotthānato naivaṃ tadā tadbhāvabhāvataḥ । dvayābodhaḥ suṣupte'pi tvajñānāditi cenna tat । svābhāvikatvāttasyāpi nimittasyānapekṣaṇāt
ENGLISH: (Refutation:) (That is) not so, for it originates from ignorance, because it (i.e. the second) exists (only as long as ignorance) exists. (Objection:) The non-perception, however, of a second in deep sleep also may be due to ignorance. (Refutation:) That (is) not (so), for it is its natural condition (and) not dependent on a cause.

[323] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V567)
SANSKRIT: anyāpekṣaṃ hi yadrūpaṃ na tattasya svato bhavet । vikriyā'vikriyā tvasya tattvamanyānapekṣaṇāt
ENGLISH: A form which is dependent on something else, does not belong to that (thing) by nature. (In that case there is) change. The true nature of a thing (is) changelessness by not being dependent on something else.

[324] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V568)
SANSKRIT: svapnavanna suṣupto'taḥ svata evādvayatvataḥ । draṣṭurdṛṣṭerna lopaḥ syātsatyamevaṃ śrutervacaḥ
ENGLISH: Hence deep sleep is not like dreaming, for it is free from duality by nature. There is no disappearance of the seeing of the seer. So what the śruti says is true.

[325] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V575)
SANSKRIT: avidyāmātrahetau tu sarvametatsamañjasam । tasyāmasatyāṃ tanna syātsatyāmeva hi bhīryataḥ
ENGLISH: When only ignorance is the cause, all this is correct. For if (ignorance) does not exist, this (fear) does not, (and) when it exists, fear does.

[326] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V576)
SANSKRIT: yadajñānādbhayaṃ yatsyāttajjñānāttatkuto bhavet । rajjusarpādivattasmādavidyaiva bhayodbhavaḥ
ENGLISH: How can the fear which originates from ignorance of something exist when knowledge of something exists, as (in the case of) the rope (and) the snake, etc.? The origination of fear therefore (takes place) through ignorance only.

[327] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V577)
SANSKRIT: vidyā'vidyātmakaṃ brahma mataṃ cenna virodhataḥ । pṛthakca dṛśyamānatvādātmano ghaṭarūpavat
ENGLISH: (Objection:) Brahman is assumed to have the nature of (both) knowledge (and) ignorance. (Refutation:) That (is) not (so), because they exclude (each other) and because they are seen to be separated from the Self, as the colour of a pot.

[328] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V578)
SANSKRIT: pratyakṣeṇa hi dṛśyete vidyāvidye manogate । na tayorātmadharmatvaṃ tasmātte nāmarūpayoḥ
ENGLISH: For knowledge and ignorance are directly seen as abiding in the mind (manas). (Hence) they are no property of the Self. Therefore they (belong to) name and form.

[329] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V579)
SANSKRIT: antarā nāmarūpe ye brahmabāhye tayorhi tat । na sto brahmaṇi te bhānāvudayāstamayāviva
ENGLISH: This (Brahman) exists in that name and form which are outside of Brahman. They do not exist in Brahman, like rising and setting (do not exist) in the sun.

[330] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V586)
SANSKRIT: naivehānnamayātmānaṃ jalūkāvatparo'ñjasā । upasaṅkrāmatītyasmādgauṇī saṅkrāntiriṣyate
ENGLISH: The highest (Self) does not pass through the self consisting of food, straight on here, like a leech. Hence the passing through is regarded as metaphorical.

[331] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V592)
SANSKRIT: tasmātsatyamanantaṃ yatsarvadā'vikalekṣaṇam । tadasmīti prabodhārthaṃ bahusyāmiti kalpyate
ENGLISH: Therefore it is declared: "May I be many" for the sake of understanding "I am that", which (is) true being, infinite (and) always sees perfectly.

[332] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V599)
SANSKRIT: na mātṛyāyino yasmātpratyayā buddhikartṛkāḥ । tannivṛttau nivartante tasmātte manasā saha
ENGLISH: Because notions, which are created by the mind, do not reach the knower, therefore they (the words) return "along with the mind (manas)", when these have disappeared.

[333] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V601)
SANSKRIT: udapādi ca yacchabdairjñānamākāravaddhiyaḥ । svato buddhaṃ tadaprāpya nāmnā saha nivartate
ENGLISH: The knowledge, which originates from words and has the form of cognition, returns along with the name, not having reached that which is by itself enlightened.

[334] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V605)
SANSKRIT: jāgradvanna yataḥ śabdaṃ suṣupte vetti kaścana । dhvaste'to vacasā'jñāne brahmāsmīti bhavenmatiḥ
ENGLISH: Because someone asleep does not understand a word as he does when awake, hence the insight: "I am Brahman" arises when ignorance is destroyed by a word.

[335] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V611)
SANSKRIT: pramātā ca pramāṇaṃ ca prameyo niścitistathā । yatsānnidhyātprasidhyanti tatsiddhau kimapekṣate
ENGLISH: How can that through the presence of which the knower, means of knowledge, object of knowledge and knowledge (itself) become existent, be dependent with regard to its own existence?

[336] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V612)
SANSKRIT: jāgratsvapnasuṣupteṣu ghaṭo'yamiti saṃvidaḥ । vyavadhānaṃ na cehāsti tadbhāvābhāvasākṣitaḥ
ENGLISH: The knowledge "This is a pot" may be blocked when awake, in dream and in deep sleep. That is not the case here (i.e. with regard to the Self), because (the Self) is witness of the existence or non-existence of that (blocking of knowledge).

[337] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V617)
SANSKRIT: bhāvyate'sannapīhārthaḥ prasiddherlokavahnivat । brahmaṇastvaprasiddhatvāttathā'pyatra sudurlabham
ENGLISH: (Though) one can imagine something, even non-existent, because it is universally known, as (in the case of) world (and) fire, still (Brahman) is very difficult to grasp, because Brahman is not universally known.

[338] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V619)
SANSKRIT: pramāṇamapramāṇaṃ ca pramā''bhāsastathaiva ca । kurvantyeva pramāṃ yatra tadasambhāvanā kutaḥ
ENGLISH: How can that be impossible with regard to which a means of knowledge, a non-means of knowledge and a pseudo-means (pramābhāsa) of knowledge bring about accuracy of perception?

[339] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V628)
SANSKRIT: na copāsāntarādhīno brahmajñānodayo bhavet । taṃ yathā, taṃ tameveti nyāyadṛbdhaśruteḥ smṛteḥ
ENGLISH: There is no origination of the knowledge of Brahman, dependent on something else, (viz.) meditation, on account of the smṛti and the śruti, combined with a nyāya saying: "Like this, that, verily, that".

[340] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V629)
SANSKRIT: nārthaspṛgbhāvanā cetsyādbrahmadhījanmane na sā । svabhyastā rājatī no dhīḥ śuktikājñānajanmane
ENGLISH: If continued meditation does not reach its object (in the beginning), it (is not capable) of the origination of the cognition of Brahman, (just as) the erroneous cognition of silver, (though) kept on for a long time, (is not capable) of the origination of the knowledge of mother-of-pearl.

[341] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V650)
SANSKRIT: cinmātravyatirekeṇa sarvapratyayasākṣiṇaḥ । rūpāntaraṃ na sambhāvyaṃ pramābhāsāttathā hnutiḥ
ENGLISH: Besides pure mind, no other form of the witness of all cognitions is possible. (Brahman) is concealed thus through pseudo-knowledge.

[342] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V651)
SANSKRIT: hānopādānahīno'yaṃ tatsākṣitvātsvato dhruvaḥ । draṣṭrādisākṣitā'pyasya tatkāraṇasamāśrayāt
ENGLISH: That which cannot be left or grasped is constant by nature, for it is the witness of that. It is the witness of the seer, etc., because it is the basis of the cause of that.

[343] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V652)
SANSKRIT: idaṃ vedmi na vedmīdamiti buddhirvivartate । pratyabhijñāśrayā sā syād draṣṭaivobhayarūpabhāk
ENGLISH: "I know this, I do not know that" thus the mind manifests itself. It (i.e. the mind) is based on recognition. The seer partakes in the nature of both (viz. knowledge and ignorance).

[344] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V653)
SANSKRIT: nirvibhāgātmakatvāttu sarvakośātivartinaḥ । rūpaṃ nānātmavannyāyyaṃ pratyabhijñāsamāśrayam
ENGLISH: Because the nature of the one who surpasses all the sheaths is without parts, the form (of the mind), which is based upon recognition, has truly a differentiated nature.

[345] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V655)
SANSKRIT: buddheḥ syādaparādho'yaṃ yadbāhyārthānukāritā । pratyaktvaṃ cinnibhatvaṃ ca kauṭasthyānnāyamātmani
ENGLISH: This is the defect of the mind, that it imitates the form of an outward object and that its inwardness (is truly) a resemblance of the (pure) consciousness. This (defect) does not exist in regard to the Self, for (the Self) is unchangeable.

[346] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V660)
SANSKRIT: ajñānamanyathājñānaṃ saṃśayajñānameva ca । ghaṭādāveva taddṛṣṭaṃ na jñātṛjñānasākṣiṣu
ENGLISH: Ignorance, erroneous knowledge and doubtful knowledge are seen here only with regard to a pot, etc.. Not in the case of knower, knowledge (and) witness.

[347] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V665)
SANSKRIT: sarvadā cātmarūpatvād vyabhicārādanātmanaḥ । brahmātmani svataḥ siddhaṃ jñānaṃ mohāpanodi yat
ENGLISH: Because it always has the nature of the Self and because the non-Self deviates from it, the knowledge which removes delusion is self-established in the Brahman-Self.

[348] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V682)
SANSKRIT: sadāvagatirūpasya jyotiścakrāvabhāsinaḥ । svayañjyotiḥsvabhāvasya nyāyyaṃ tasmānna darśanam
ENGLISH: Truly that whose nature is always understanding, who is shining with an overwhelming light, whose nature is light which shines by itself, cannot be seen.

[349] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V721)
SANSKRIT: brahmaṇo brāhmaṇasyeti bhedaścātraupacārikaḥ । rāhoḥ śirovanmukhyastu naiva syānnirguṇatvataḥ
ENGLISH: The distinction here between Brahman and what belongs to Brahman is a metaphorical one. (The distinction,) however, is not a primary one no more than (the distinction between) Rāhu (and his) head, for (Brahman) is devoid of properties.

[350] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V722)
SANSKRIT: mahimā brāhmaṇasyaiṣa hānivṛddhivivarjitaḥ । svataḥ siddhervijānaṃstaṃ na bibheti kutaścana
ENGLISH: The greatness of that which belongs to Brahman is free from decline or growth, for it is self-established. He who understands this does not fear anything.

[351] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V745)
SANSKRIT: liṅgadehāśritaṃ kārśyaṃ tacca karmanibandhanam । karma kartrādisambhūtaṃ kartrādyajñānahetukam
ENGLISH: Weakness is based on the subtle body and this (body) is caused by action. Action, originating in agent, etc., is caused by ignorance of the agent, etc.

[352] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V746)
SANSKRIT: ahaṃ brahmetyato jñānāddhvastāyāṃ pratyagātmani । kārśyahetāvavidyāyāmekatvādbalayatyayam
ENGLISH: When ignorance, the cause of weakness, is removed with regard to the Self through the knowledge: "I am Brahman", he strengthens the Self by oneness.

[353] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V747)
SANSKRIT: svato buddhaṃ svataḥ śuddhaṃ svato muktaṃ yathoditam । vedaivaṃ yaḥ svamātmānaṃ phalaṃ tasyedṛśaṃ smṛtam
ENGLISH: For him, who knows his own Self (to be) conscious of itself, pure of itself, released of itself, as has been said, such a result is related.

[354] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V001)
SANSKRIT: satyaṃ jñānamanantaṃ yad brahmoktaṃ pratyagātmani । tadabhinnaṃ paraṃ jñānamuktaṃ mohāpanodi yat
ENGLISH: Brahman, which was said (to be) in the inner Self, (is) true being, knowledge, infinite. The knowledge which is said to destroy delusion (is identical with) that undivided, transcendent Brahman.

[355] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V002)
SANSKRIT: abhidhitsurathedānīṃ yathoktajñānasiddhaye । yatsādhakatamaṃ tasya prāptyai pravavṛte śrutiḥ
ENGLISH: The śruti, now wishing to mention the most effective means for bringing about knowledge as has been related, is active for reaching that (knowledge).

[356] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V003)
SANSKRIT: gurudvāraiva vidyeyamācāryāddheti naḥ śrutiḥ । śiṣyopādhyāyarūpeyamata ākhyāyikocyate
ENGLISH: This knowledge (is mediated) by means of a teacher. The śruti (says) to us: "from a teacher". Hence a short narrative is related in the form of (a conversation between) pupil and teacher.

[357] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V004)
SANSKRIT: adhīhi bhagavo brahmetyetanmantrābhiśabditam । antarṇītaṇijarthasya hyadhīhīti bhavedyataḥ
ENGLISH: "Venerable sir, teach me Brahman", this is related as a mantra, because (the word) "teach" belongs to which already contains the sense of a causative.

[358] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V005)
SANSKRIT: jijñāsuḥ paramaṃ brahma śraddhābhaktipuraḥsaraḥ । upasīdedgarīyāṃsaṃ mantreṇānena śuddhadhīḥ
ENGLISH: He who wishes to know the transcendent Brahman may, provided already with faith and devotion and with a pure mind, honour (his) most venerable (teacher) by this mantra.

[359] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V006)
SANSKRIT: mokṣādarvākṣu bhogeṣu vyāvṛttakaraṇo bhṛguḥ । adhyāpaya paraṃ brahmetyapṛcchadvaruṇaṃ gurum
ENGLISH: Bhṛgu, whose senses are turned away from enjoyments, which are inferior to release, asked Varuṇa, the teacher: "Teach (me) the transcendent Brahman".

[360] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V007)
SANSKRIT: annaṃ prāṇamitītyādi varuṇo bhṛgave'vadat । dehakāraṇamannaṃ syātprāṇaḥ prāṇādikāraṇam । cakṣuḥ śrotraṃ mano vākca karaṇānyupalabdhaye
ENGLISH: Varuṇa said to Bhṛgu: "Food, vital air", etc., Food is the cause of the body. Vital air is the cause of prāṇa, etc. Sight, hearing, mind (and) speech (are) means of perception.

[361] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V012)
SANSKRIT: utpattisthitināśeṣu brahmādisthāvarāvadhi । nātyeti brahmarūpaṃ yattadbrahmeti pratīyatām
ENGLISH: That which in coming into being, existence and passing away from Brahman up to immovable objects does not cease to have the nature of Brahman, that should be understood (to be) Brahman.

[362] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V014)
SANSKRIT: tapaścacāra tacchrutvā bhṛgurbrahmopalabdhaye । pratipede tapo'nuktaṃ sāvaśeṣoktikāraṇāt
ENGLISH: Having heard this Bhṛgu practised asceticism for the sake of knowing Brahman. He understood asceticism (to be practised though it was) not said, because something was said (which needed) a complement.

[363] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V015)
SANSKRIT: śṛṅgagrāhikayoktvā'pi hyannaṃ brahmeti lakṣaṇam । pitovāca yatastasmāttapo bheje svayaṃ bhṛguḥ
ENGLISH: Because his father told him the characteristics (of Brahman), (saying) “Brahman is food”, having not expressly (śṛṅgagrāhika) spoken thus, therefore Bhṛgu practised spontaneously asceticism.

[364] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V016)
SANSKRIT: brahma sākṣānna nirdiṣṭaṃ lakṣaṇokterato bhṛguḥ । nūnamākāṅkṣate yogyaṃ sādhanaṃ brahmavittaye
ENGLISH: Brahman was not indicated directly by mentioning its attributes. (That was) no doubt (why) Bhṛgu sought a suitable means of (acquiring) the knowledge of Brahman.

[365] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V017)
SANSKRIT: tapoviśeṣāditsā syāttatsādhanatamatvataḥ । yaddustaraṃ yaddurāpamiti smṛtyanuśāsanāt
ENGLISH: One may wish to undertake a particular type of asceticism, for this (asceticism) is an outstanding means, because the smṛti instructs: “That which is difficult to overcome, that which is difficult to attain”.

[366] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V018)
SANSKRIT: manasaścendriyāṇāṃ cetyevamādhyātmikaṃ tapaḥ । iha nyāyyaṃ prasiddhaṃ tu hyārādupakaroti naḥ
ENGLISH: Here that asceticism is in accordance with the right method, that concerns the inner person, (i.e.) of the mind and the senses. The common (asceticism) helps us indirectly.

[367] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V019)
SANSKRIT: anvayavyatirekādicintanaṃ vā tapo bhavet । ahaṃ brahmetivākyārthabodhāyālamidaṃ yataḥ
ENGLISH: Or asceticism means “reflection”, (i.e.) connection and separation, etc., because this can make known the sense of the proposition “I am Brahman”.

[368] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V020)
SANSKRIT: ko'haṃ kasya kuto veti kaḥ kathaṃ vā bhavediti । prayojanamatirnityamevaṃ mokṣāśramī bhavet । vyāsaḥ prāhāta evedaṃ mumukṣormuktaye tapaḥ
ENGLISH: 20. “Who (am) I; of whom?” or “Whence”? “Who?” or “How is it?”. He whose thinking (constantly is) thus a means (of release), is in the stage of release. Hence Vyāsa said this: "Asceticism (should be practised) for the sake of release by him who desires release".

[369] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V023)
SANSKRIT: uktānyannamayādīni yāni teṣāṃ tu kāraṇam । annādi pratipattavyaṃ na hi kārye'sti lakṣaṇam
ENGLISH: The cause of these (beings), consisting of food, etc., is understood (to be) food, etc. For this characteristic cannot be applied to the product.

[370] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V024)
SANSKRIT: śuṅgaṃ hyannamayādyetadannāderupajāyate । kāryapravilayaśrutyā kāraṇānandametyataḥ
ENGLISH: That which consists of food, etc., (and) originates from food, etc., (is) the product. Hence one attains the bliss which is the cause on account of the śruti (which teaches) the destruction of the product (in the cause).

[371] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V025)
SANSKRIT: kāryāṇi kāraṇeṣvevaṃ tāni caivottarottaram । pravilāpya parānandaṃ yāyādvācāmagocaram
ENGLISH: Having thus destroyed the products in the causes successively, one attains the supreme bliss which is beyond the range of words.

[372] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V026)
SANSKRIT: annaṃ brahmeti vijñāya kāryatvaṃ tasya vīkṣya saḥ । saṃśayocchittaye bhūyo gatvā'pṛcchad guruṃ bhṛguḥ
ENGLISH: Having recognized: "Food is Brahman" and understood that food is a product, Bhṛgu approached his teacher again and asked (him) to destroy his doubt.

[373] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V027)
SANSKRIT: annāderbrahmaṇaścaivaṃ doṣaṃ dṛṣṭvā sa kāryatām । bhūyo bhūyaḥ paraṃ brahma papracchā''tṛṇṇivartanāt
ENGLISH: Having perceived that the fact that Brahman, as (being) food, etc., is with products, is a deficiency, he asked again and again for the transcendent Brahman, until his thirst (for knowledge) had ended.

[374] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V034)
SANSKRIT: yuṣmadasmadvibhāgo'yaṃ yatra vyāvartate'ñjasā । sa ātmā tatparaṃ vyoma tatra vidyā pratiṣṭhitā
ENGLISH: When the separation between object and subject is removed directly, that is the Self, that is the highest space, therein knowledge is established.

[375] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V041)
SANSKRIT: anyonyasthitihetutvādannānnādatvamucyate । śarīraprāṇayorevamuttareṣvapi nirṇayaḥ
ENGLISH: Body and vital air are said (to be) related as food and eater of food, because they are the cause of each other's existence. This can be demonstrated likewise in the following cases.

[376] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V043)
SANSKRIT: vasatyarthaṃ tathā''yātaṃ pratyācakṣīta naiva tam । vasate cānnadānārthaṃ kuryādannaṃ gṛhī bahu
ENGLISH: One should not refuse someone who has come for the sake of refuge. The householder may make food very much for the sake of giving food to the one who takes refuge.

[377] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V044)
SANSKRIT: etadvai mukhata iti satkāroktistridhā bhavet । vayovasthā tridhā vā syādannadānavivakṣayā
ENGLISH: (The words) "This, indeed, first" concerning hospitality are (said) three times. By wishing to speak about giving food the stage of life (is) indeed (related) as (being) threefold.

[378] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V045)
SANSKRIT: rāddhaṃ siddhaṃ bhavedannaṃ pātrebhyo yasya tasya tu । yathāsatkāravayasī annadānaphalaṃ bhavet
ENGLISH: "Succeeded" means "(is) successful". From whose vessels the food (has come) to him it belongs. The result of the giving of food is according to hospitality and period of life.

[379] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V050)
SANSKRIT: aprāptaprāpaṇaṃ yogaḥ kṣemaścobhayarūpabhṛt । prāṇāpānāśrayaṃ brahma tadupāsīta tau hyataḥ
ENGLISH: "Acquisition" (is) "the obtaining of that which is unobtained". A secure state has the nature of both. Brahman resides in the outward vital air and in the downward vital air. Hence one should meditate upon these as (being) this (Brahman).

[380] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V051)
SANSKRIT: yogakṣemātmakaṃ brahma prāṇāpānasamāśrayam । karmeti hastayostadvadupāsītāpramādavān
ENGLISH: Brahman has the nature of acquisition and secure state and is the basis of the outward vital air (and) the downward vital air. Likewise the cautious one should meditate upon "the work in the hands" (as being Brahman).

[381] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V053)
SANSKRIT: manuṣyaviṣayā yasmādājñā viṣṇoriyaṃ tataḥ । samājñā mānuṣīstvevaṃ sadaivā''cakṣate budhāḥ
ENGLISH: Because this name of Viṣṇu concerns man, therefore wise men always call human names in this way.

[382] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V055)
SANSKRIT: tena tenātmanā tadvaduttareṣvapi cintayet । brahmopastha upāsīta prajātyādiguṇātmakam
ENGLISH: Through this very nature one may think concerning the following (words) also in like manner. One should meditate upon Brahman, which has the properties of offspring, etc., "in the generative organ".

[383] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V056)
SANSKRIT: prajātiḥ putrapautrādiramṛtatvaṃ tataḥ pituḥ । ānandaḥ puruṣārtho'tra sopyupasthāśrayo bhavet
ENGLISH: "Procreation" (means) "sons, grandsons, etc.". For the father "immortality" (originates) thereof. "Bliss" is a human goal here. It depends on the generative organ.

[384] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V057)
SANSKRIT: ākāśe sarvamityevaṃ brahmopāsyaṃ samāhitaiḥ । sarvāśrayaṃ tadākāśa upāsīnasya śiṣyate
ENGLISH: Those who are well-concentrated should meditate upon "the All in space" as Brahman. The basis of the All is taught to the one who meditates (to be) in space.

[385] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V058)
SANSKRIT: tatpratiṣṭhetyupāsīta pratiṣṭhāvānasau bhavet । upāsanānurūpaṃ syātphalaṃ yādṛgidaṃ tathā
ENGLISH: One should meditate on the foundation as (being) that (Brahman). (Then) one becomes founded. The result corresponds to the meditation. The same applies also to (the other meditations).

[386] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V059)
SANSKRIT: tadbrahma maha ityevamupāsīta tataḥ phalam । prajādibhirmahānsa syāttaṃ yatheti śrutistathā
ENGLISH: One may meditate on "that", (i.e.) Brahman, thus as "greatness". Of that meditation the fruit (is mentioned): He becomes "great" by offspring. So the śruti says: "in whatever".

[387] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V060)
SANSKRIT: tanmana ityupāsīta manasvī mānavānbhavet । prahvībhāvo namo'rthaḥ syātphalaṃ tasyedamucyate । namyante'sya yathākāmaṃ viṣayā bhogakāriṇaḥ
ENGLISH: One may meditate on "mind" (*manas*) as this (Brahman), (then) one becomes "mind-having", (i.e.) intelligent. The meaning of "adoration" is humbleness. The result of this is mentioned here: The objects which cause enjoyment yield themselves to him according to his desire.

[388] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V068)
SANSKRIT: avidyotthaṃ dvayābhāsaṃ bhojyabhoktṛtvalakṣaṇam । yatra hi dvaitamityādyā śrutirnaḥ pratyapīpadat
ENGLISH: The śruti teaches us (with the words) "For where duality", etc., that the appearance of duality, characterized by object of experience and the one who experiences, originates from ignorance.

[389] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V069)
SANSKRIT: yatra tvasyeti vidhvastasarvāvidyādilakṣaṇe । niṣedhati sadā'vidyādhyastaṃ dvaitamihātmani
ENGLISH: (With the words) "Where, however, of him" (the śruti) denies a duality, which is always through ignorance erroneously attributed to the Self, which is characterized by freedom from all ignorance.

[390] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V074)
SANSKRIT: nirātmakasya sarvasya brahmā''tmā yena tatparam । satyajñānādirūpatvāttadetadadhunocyate
ENGLISH: Brahman is the essence of all that has (by itself) no essence. Therefore it (is by itself) the transcendent, for it has the nature of true being, knowledge, etc. This will be explained now.

[391] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V078)
SANSKRIT: na hi sañcaraṇaṃ sākṣādbrahmaṇo'styavikāriṇaḥ । yatra hi dhyāyatīveti tathā ca śrutiśāsanam
ENGLISH: (There) is no real "passing to" Brahman, which is unchangeable, regarding which the śruti teaches "seeming to think".

[392] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V079)
SANSKRIT: sarvātmatvādimām̐llokānpaśyannātmatayā budhaḥ । etadbrahma samaṃ sāma gāyannāste kṛtārthataḥ
ENGLISH: The wise one, seeing the world as the Self, because the Self is the All, sings continually this chant, (i.e.) the unchanging Brahman, because he has attained his object.

[393] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V080)
SANSKRIT: dvedhā bhinnamidaṃ sarvamannamannāda eva ca । satyādṛśyādirūpātmā ahamevaitadīkṣyatām
ENGLISH: All this is divided into two parts: food and eater of food. (The word) "I" here should be understood (to be) the Self, whose nature is "true being", "invisible", etc.

[394] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V081)
SANSKRIT: tayoḥ ślokaśca sambandho bhojyabhoktṛtvalakṣaṇaḥ । ahameva yathoktātmā na matto'nyastato'sti hi
ENGLISH: "Śloka" is the connection between both these (food and eater of food). It is characterized by the relation between object of experience and the one who experiences. "I" (is) the Self, as it is explained, therefore there is no one else but me.

[395] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V082)
SANSKRIT: kriyākārakanirmuktaṃ paśyannātmānamātmani । triraho iti bhavetstobho vismayārthaśca sa smṛtaḥ
ENGLISH: Seeing the Self, free from activity and factors in oneself, three times "aho" may be a chanted interjection and related to indicate amazement.

[396] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V083)
SANSKRIT: triruktiścādarārtheyamahamannamitīṣyate । aśraddadhānalokasya pratipattyarthamucyate
ENGLISH: The utterance "I (am) food" three times is regarded (to be) for the sake of emphasis. It is said, that the world, which has no confidence, may understand.

[397] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V084)
SANSKRIT: mūrtāmūrtātmakasyāsya hyannānnādatvarūpiṇaḥ । atadvānagrajo'haṃ vai na tadaśnāti hi śrutiḥ
ENGLISH: "I" (am) "the first-born" of (this world), the nature of which is material and non-material, which consists of food and eater of food, (though I am) not partaking of it. For "it eats not", the śruti (says).

[398] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V085)
SANSKRIT: devebhyaḥ pūrvamevāhaṃ nābhirasmyamṛtasya ca । kāraṇatvādbhavennābhirmanniṣṭhā vā'mṛtātmatā
ENGLISH: I am earlier than the gods. I am the centre of immortality. It may be (said): "centre", because it is the cause (of immortality) or the possessing of the nature of immortality depends on me.

[399] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V088)
SANSKRIT: satyajñānādirūpo'hamavidyotthamaśeṣataḥ । ahaṃ hyabhibhavāmyeko dinakṛcchārvaraṃ yathā
ENGLISH: I alone, who have the nature of "true being, knowledge", etc., have overcome entirely (this world), which originates in ignorance, like the sun (overcomes) nocturnal darkness.

[400] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V089)
SANSKRIT: dhyānaikatānanibiḍāhitacetaso'jaṃ pradhvastakṛtsnanijamohasamastadoṣam । pratyaktayā śubhadhiyo yatayo'bhyupetya yaṃ devamekamamalaṃ praviśanti so'vyāt
ENGLISH: May God, (who is) one, spotless, ungenerated, free from any innate delusion (or) any fault, into whom the ascetics of pure cognition, whose minds are firmly directed to one object: meditation, having approached (that God) as the interior one, enter, that (God) protect (us).

[401] TUBV.txt (TUBV-V090.091)
SANSKRIT: taittirīyakasārasya vārtikāmṛtāmuttamam । maskarīndrapraṇītasya bhāṣyasyaitadvivecanam mumukṣusārthavāhasya bhavanāmabhṛto yateḥ । śiṣyaścakāra tadbhaktyā sureśākhyo mahārthavit
ENGLISH: I, named Sureśvara, knowing many things, the pupil of the ascetic, who bears the name of Śiva (and who is) the leader of the caravan of those who desire release, made this excellent critical sub-commentary—which is (like) ambrosia—on the commentary, written by the best of the religious mendicants, on the core of the Taittirīya Upaniṣad, out of devotion to him.
